Raw cod is a food item that can be eaten by the player or cooked to make cooked cod.

Cod always drops 1 raw cod when killed, unaffected by Looting. If it is killed while on fire, it drops 1 cooked cod instead.

When killed, dolphins drop 01 raw cod. The maximum amount is increased by 1 per level of Looting, for a maximum of 0-4 with Looting III. If killed while on fire, they drop cooked cod instead.

Guardians and elder guardians have a 40% and 50% chance, respectively, to drop raw cod when killed. In Java Edition, cooked cod is dropped if a guardian is on fire when killed.
Guardians and elder guardians also have a 2.5% chance to drop a random fish, with 60% of them being raw cod, which drops as cooked if the guardian was on fire. The chance of getting the fish drop is increased by 1% per level with Looting (for a maximum of 5.5% with Looting III), but the type of fish is not affected.

Polar bears have a 75% chance of dropping 02 raw cod when killed. The maximum amount can be increased by 1 per level of Looting, for a maximum of 0-5 with Looting III. If killed while on fire, they drop cooked cod instead.

Raw cod can be obtained from fishing. The wait time of one being caught is decreased with the Lure enchantment and the chance of one being caught is slightly decreased with the Luck of the Sea enchantment (named as such because it increases treasure, not fish).
Catching cod awards 1-6 experience.

Java Edition

in Java Edition, fisherman villagers throw raw cod at players under the Hero of the Village effect.

Raw cod restores 2 () hunger and 0.4 saturation.

Raw cod can be used to tame cats with 13 chance of success, get cats off of chests, and beds, breed cats, and make baby cats grow up faster by 10% of the remaining time. Additionally, raw cod can be used to heal cats by 2.
Raw cod can be used to gain ocelot trust, breed ocelots, and make baby ocelots grow up by 10%. 

Dolphins can be fed raw cod. Doing this improves their trust and interaction with the player. However, unlike most animals, feeding dolphins does not allow them to breed.
When a player feeds raw cod to a dolphin, it swims toward the nearest chest in an underwater ruins or shipwreck. If the chest in the nearest structure is broken, they swim to the next nearest structure that has a chest.

Fisherman villagers have 50% chance to sell 6 cooked cod for 6 raw cod and 1 emerald as part of their first tier trade.
Apprentice-level fisherman villagers have a 23 chance to buy 15 raw cod for an emerald in Java Edition, and always offer the same trade in Bedrock Edition.

In Bedrock Edition, raw cod can be used to feed wolves, to heal them by 2. However, unlike other meat items, raw cod cannot be used to speed up the growth of baby wolves nor used to breed them, thus making it only feedable when wolves are not at full health.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Raw Cod" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

 

While a raw cod cannot be equipped in the head slot in Survival mode, equipping it using the /item command causes it to appear at the side of the player's head.

Fishing