Forests are the most common biome in Minecraft, whose climate is temperate, representing seasonal forests with many oak and some birch trees. The forest holds some useful resources for players. There is an abundance of trees that can be harvested for wood. However, this also makes the biome dangerous, as they lower a player's visibility, making it more difficult to spot hostile mobs. There a total of two variants in the biome family, the regular forest and the flower forest.

Forests feature dense trees compared to other biomes. Lily of the valley, rose bushes, peonies and lilacs generate in this biome family along with the usual poppies and dandelions. Grass takes on a dark but vibrant green color. Bees from bee nests on trees are found as well. 
Like almost every other overword biome in the game, lava lakes can generate here, which can cause locally destructive forest fires, due to the density of flammable wood and leaves; the same goes for lightning strikes that hit the trees during thunderstorms, though the fires caused by the strikes are usually quickly put out by the rain.

There are two forest biome variants (forest and flower forest), with one removed variant (wooded hills) in previous versions. Not included are dark forests and birch forests, as they are considered separate biomes.

The forest biome is common and densely wooded with oak and birch trees. Wolves spawn here.
Forest is one of the most preferred biomes to start a survival world, serving abundant amounts of wood, grass and flowers, water and passive mobs, and they do not have many dangers aside from the usual hostile mobs. Tamed wolves can help fight against hostile mobs, making them especially useful when players lack resources for armor. The density of the trees, however, can obstruct vision and get a player lost quickly; random surface-level lava lakes are possible, albeit rare, and start forest fires when close to trees. Building shelter here might be frustrating, due to having to clean up the zone before.
The following mobs are naturally spawned here

The flower forest variant has fewer trees and grass than the regular forest but boasts large quantities of flowers across its landscape. The probability of generating a beehive on each tree is ten times higher than in a regular forest. All types of flowers except for sunflowers, blue orchids, torchflower and wither roses generate in the flower forest. The vast number of flowers makes this biome variant an excellent source of dye.
Flower forests are rarer than standard forest biome and are most commonly bordered by plains biomes or separted from sunflower plains by rivers.
Unlike regular forests, wolves do not spawn in flower forests. However, they can occasionally spawn rabbits, which do not spawn in regular forests. Bees and bee nests also spawn in this biome more commonly. The following mobs are naturally spawned here

These music tracks play while the player is in the forest.

These music tracks play while the player is in the flower forest.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

In versions before alpha 1.2.0, forested areas existed within various landforms which were randomly generated across the world, as true biomes did not exist yet. Trees are generated in abundance within "woods" and "Woods Mountain" terrain, and more sparsely in "Original" and "Original Mountain" terrain. Along with plains, it was one of the first biomes in the game.

Birch Forest
Dark Forest
Taiga
Old Growth Taiga
Jungle
Meadow
Rain forest
Seasonal Forest

Around the Block: Flower Forest  Minecraft.net on June 16, 2022