A boat with chest is a single chest occupying the passenger seat of a boat, and functions as such. As it can still be driven it can be used to transport items over bodies of water.

A boat with chest can be directly retrieved by attacking it, as it drops itself in item form, along with its contents.
Tools and weapons with damage above 4 can instantly destroy a boat with chest in one hit.

A boat with chest can be used for the transportation of players, mobs and items, or as fuel when smelting.

A boat with chest can be used as fuel in a furnace, it lasts 60 seconds, smelting up to 6 items.

Boats with chests can carry only one entity while regular boats can carry up to two.

Boats with chests share most behaviors with boats.

The inventory of the boat with chest has the same amount of slots as a single chest. Its inventory can be accessed by sneaking and interacting with the boat with chest, interacting with the part of the boat with chest that actually contains the chest while another player or entity is inside the boat, or by opening the player's inventory while inside the boat. This means that the player cannot access armor slots without exiting the boat.
When a boat with chest moves above, underneath, or beside a hopper, its inventory is filled or drained accordingly. Due to the size of its hitbox, a boat with chest can be placed above up to 9 hoppers, allowing it to evenly split its items nine ways.

In Java Edition, unlike most other storage devices, a boat with chest renamed in an anvil does not display the custom name in its GUI.

As with other chests, opening or breaking a boat with chest causes nearby piglin(s) to attack the player.

Java Edition:
Boats with chests use the Friendly Creatures sound category for entity-dependent sound events.

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Boat with chests have entity data associated with them that contain various properties of the entity.
Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

See Bedrock Edition level format/Entity format.

Issues relating to "Boat with Chest" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

A chest is short enough that a boat with chest falls onto it rather than crashes into it.
The chest texture is 1212 pixels, rather than the 1414 pixel texture the block uses. This is not the case with the minecart with chest.
Despite the minecart with chest using the Christmas texture, the boat with chest still uses the default chest texture during Christmas time.