A book and quill is an item used to write written books.

By pressing use item or long pressing screen anywhere while holding a book and quill in their hand, the player can open a text editor GUI.
Using this GUI, the player can write a single book up to 100 or 50 pages long, with up to 798 characters per page. The player can write up to 79,800 or 12,800 characters inside the entire book. No page may be longer than 14 lines and each line can have a width of 114 pixels (see pixel width of each character here). 
The player has the ability to copy and paste into books. However, the paste does not work if the text being pasted is longer than a single page. Most Unicode characters are available in books, and they may be pasted in without issue.
In singleplayer, the world pauses while a book is being edited.

One can place a book and quill or a written book on an empty lectern.
The lectern then emits a redstone signal depending on the displayed page in the book. On the last page, the lectern emits a signal strength of 15. This is why lecterns are listed in the "redstone" tab in the creative inventory.

                                                                           
Text in a book can be styled using codes starting with the  character (section sign).

 + k creates randomly changing characters.
 + l creates bold text.
 + m creates strikethrough text.
 + n creates underlined text.
 + o creates italic text.
 + 0  f (hexadecimal) creates colored text.
 + r resets any of the previous styles so text after it appears normally.
If the player uses multiple codes, and continue typing past the end of a line, the next line exhibits only the last formatting code used.

Books can be signed by pressing the "Sign" button while in the interface. In Java Edition, when signed, a book bears the name of the player who wrote it and a title chosen upon signing. In Bedrock Edition, the book doesn't display the name of the player as the author; instead, the author can be any text the player wants. After it has been signed, it cannot be edited again  it has turned into a written book.
Special characters can be used in the title, if typed from a keyboard that supports them. Alt codes do not work, and the  character cannot be typed even using a keyboard that implements it, meaning titles cannot be colored or formatted in-game. However, on Linux using the compose key to produce special characters does work.
The title of the book can be up to 16 characters long, and the player cannot paste into a title. A "workaround" for the 16-character limitation is to manually rename the book at an anvil, which always costs 1 experience level. This can be done with either a written book or a book and quill  both versions will always display the changed name. If a custom name is removed from a written book, it will revert back to the title it was given during the signing process.

Using the chiseled bookshelf while having a book and quill in the main hand will put the book inside the chiseled bookshelf.

In Bedrock Edition, expert-level librarian villagers buy 2 books and quills for one emerald. Book and quill is offered in two item slots due to being non-stackable.
In Java Edition, expert-level librarian villagers have a 50% chance to buy 2 books and quills for one emerald. The amount of books and quills needed is supposed to be 2, but due to the item being non-stackable, only one is needed for the trade.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

See Bedrock Edition level format/Item format.

Issues relating to "Book and Quill" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

The in-game restrictions on books are not hard limits. Third party editors or commands can make books have more than 100 pages (2,147,483,639 pages), more than 256 characters per page (32,767 characters per page), can change author names, and can have colored titles, among other things. These books still function properly in vanilla Minecraft, meaning the player may encounter such books on adventure maps or multiplayer servers.
If the player renames a book and quill in an anvil before signing it, it retains the name from the anvil instead of taking the name from signing.

Bookshop - Book Sharing And Editing Tool
Full-Width Text Generator
Small Caps Text Generator
Revise - External Book Editor

Book
Bookshelf
Written Book