A diamond is a mineral that can only be obtained from diamond ore, loot chests and suspicious blocks. It is required to craft diamond tools and armor (and therefore obtain obsidian to access the Nether), enchanting tables, jukeboxes, duplicating smithing templates, and is essential for obtaining Netherite tools and armor.

Diamond ore can be mined using an iron pickaxe or stronger. An ore drops a single diamond. If mined by any other tool, it drops nothing. If the pickaxe is enchanted with Fortune, it can drop an extra diamond per level of Fortune, allowing for a maximum of 4 diamonds with Fortune III. If the ore is mined using a pickaxe enchanted with Silk Touch, it drops an ore block rather than a diamond. The ore is found at level 15 or lower, most commonly between -50 and -64; levels -58 and -59 are the preferred levels to mine at since they don't contain bedrock, as it starts spawning at -60.

Diamonds can be obtained in Trial Chambers as rewards from both Ominous Vaults and Vaults, from chests and barrels located at intersections, or dropped from broken Decorated Pots. Can also be obtained in block form from Ominous Vaults and Decorated Pots. 

When brushing suspicious sand in desert pyramids, they have a 17 chance to drop a diamond.

Diamonds are mainly used to craft high-tier armor and equipment, which in turn are also used in making netherite armor and equipment. 

In Bedrock Edition, expert-level armorer, toolsmith, and weaponsmith villagers buy one diamond for an emerald as part of their trades.
In Java Edition, journeyman-level armorer villagers have a 40% chance of offering to buy one diamond for one emerald. Expert-level toolsmith villagers have 23 chance of offering to buy one diamond for one emerald. Expert-level weaponsmith villagers always offer to buy one diamond for one emerald.

Diamonds are the repair items for the diamond tier and armor material, and thus can be used to repair the following items in an anvil or grindstone:

Diamond Helmet
Diamond Chestplate
Diamond Leggings
Diamond Boots
Diamond Sword
Diamond Pickaxe
Diamond Axe
Diamond Shovel
Diamond Hoe

Diamonds can be used to select powers from a beacon. The player must select one of the available powers then insert a diamond into the item slot. 
A diamond can be substituted for an iron ingot, a gold ingot, an emerald or a netherite ingot.

Trim color palette
The following color palettes are shown on the designs on trimmed armor:

 (a darker color palette is used when a diamond armor piece is trimmed using a diamond).

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Diamond" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Unlike in Minecraft, newly mined diamonds in real life are rough, cloudy stones. The largest, purest ones are polished into crystal-clear gemstones, while the rest are used in industry for cutting and grinding.
Diamonds were finally made renewable in update 1.21 with the addition of The vaults in trial chambers.
In the April fools version Java Edition 2.0, diamond chickens can lay diamonds. This does not exist in newer versions, as this was a joke.
The item forms of diamonds and turtle eggs have the same shape.

Taking Inventory: Diamond  Minecraft.net on February 20, 2019