An eye of ender is a craftable item used to locate strongholds and activate the end portals within them.

To locate strongholds (and the end portals they house):

Pressing use while holding an eye of ender causes it to fly approximately 12 blocks in the direction of the nearest stronghold, traveling through any blocks necessary, and leave a trail of purple particles, the same particle effect used for endermen and ender chests.
The eye leads to the chunk where a spiral staircase, the first room generated in the stronghold, is located.
The center of this entrance staircase is always exactly at the chunk coordinates 4, ~, 4, although the eye of ender leads to chunk coordinates 0, ~, 0 (the northwest corner of the chunk).
While over 12 blocks away from the northwest corner of the staircase chunk, the eye will travel upward to offer an easily-visible indication of the horizontal direction the player must travel.
When closer than 12 blocks to the northwest corner of the staircase chunk, the eye will travel downward, to indicate the player is above a stronghold and must mine downward.
After two or three seconds of travel, the eye floats in the air briefly, then either falls (becoming collectable again) or shatters in mid-air. The eye has a 20% chance of shattering (80% chance of surviving) per throw, therefore throwing it three times has approximately 50% overall chance to shatter the eye (0.83=51.2%).
The eye of ender's flying function works only in the Overworld. It does nothing in the Nether, the End, custom dimensions, or in worlds with no strongholds.
Note that the eyes may point to an incorrect location if the target chunks were generated with a different biomes map in an older version or through different generation settings.

Once an end portal is found, the eyes of ender are required to activate it. End portals require a total of 12 eyes of ender in order to activate, though each individual frame-block has a 10% chance of containing an eye of ender when generated. Eyes can be placed in empty End portal frames by pressing use on them until the entire ring of 12 is filled, thereby activating the portal. Due to the fact that there is a 10% chance of each individual end portal frame having an eye in it, there is a one out of one trillion chance of every frame having an eye in it thereby activating the portal even if the player doesn't have any eyes of ender.

Java Edition:
Eyes of ender use the Friendly Creatures sound category for entity-dependent sound events.

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

The purple particles left by eyes of ender have entity data that define various properties of the entity.
Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

See Bedrock Edition level format/Entity format.

Note: This video does not mention that eyes of ender can be used to craft ender chests or end crystals.

Issues relating to "Eye of Ender" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

When thrown in third-person view, the eyes of ender fly out from the player's feet instead of their hand.
Before Java Edition 1.9, eyes of ender can be purchased from cleric villagers, which means players can find a stronghold and go to the End without accessing the Nether at all.
In Bedrock Edition if the player travels beyond a certain radius (roughly 740,000 blocks), eyes of ender always point to a stronghold near spawn, even though strongholds continue to generate past this limit. If one travels to this limit, they can see eyes of ender suddenly switching direction. A similar phenomenon occurs with the /locate command.

A super-easy stronghold triangulation tool
JSFiddle Eye of Ender triangulator - can guess the location of other 2 strongholds in the first ring
Minecraft Stronghold Locator Eye of Ender throw plotting visualizer - zoomable to show all possible stronghold rings
Python Eye of Ender throw plotting tool
HTML Eye of Ender throw plotting visualizer (not updated after 1.9 stronghold placement changes)
Chunk Base Stronghold Finder (seed-based)
Amidst - File-based world visualizer
Find strongholds by analyzing stronghold.dat file