A glass bottle is an item that can hold water, potions, honey, or dragon's breath.

Glass bottles can be obtained by crafting, drinking from bottles, fishing, or from witch drops.

Drinking a potion or honey bottle returns the empty glass bottle. Throwing a splash potion or a lingering potion does not return a glass bottle, but brewing a lingering potion gives back a glass bottle.

Witches have a chance of dropping 06 glass bottles upon death. This is increased by 3 per level of Looting, for a maximum of 015 glass bottles.

Using a water bottle, splash water bottle or lingering water bottle on dirt, coarse dirt or rooted dirt will transforming it into a mud block, at the same time leaving the player with an empty glass bottle.

Using a water bottle (or, in Bedrock Edition, a potion, splash potion, or lingering potion) on a cauldron that is not yet full adds that liquid to the cauldron, leaving the player with an empty glass bottle.

Glass bottles can be filled to make water bottles, which can then be used to brew items with a brewing stand. Glass bottles are also used to hold the resulting potion.

A bottle may be filled with water by holding it in the hand and using it on a water source block or a cauldron that has water in it. It can also be filled using a waterlogged block.
Also, a bottle may be filled by powering a dispenser containing a bottle and pointed at a water source block. This does not work with cauldrons.
If filled via a water source, the water is unaffected. If filled via a cauldron, 13 of the water in the cauldron is removed. Therefore, using a cauldron to fill water bottles is inefficient, except in the Nether where it is normally the only way to fill bottles.

In Bedrock Edition, a bottle may be filled with potion by using it on a cauldron containing potion. When the bottle is filled, 13 of the cauldron's potion is removed.

If a bee nest or beehive is full, the player can use a glass bottle on the block, or may power a dispenser that contains a bottle and is pointed at the block, which empties the block and creates a honey bottle. Honey bottles can also be emptied by using them in crafting recipes (such as sugar or honey block). However, a lingering potion use on tipped arrow recipe does not give the bottle back.

Using a glass bottle in clouds emitted when the ender dragon breathes or shoots a dragon fireball fills the bottle with dragon's breath.
When put 2 or more dragon's breath in the brewing stand, after the brewing process, a glass bottle will drop as an entity. However, if put only 1 dragon's breath in the brewing stand, after the brewing process, the glass bottle is consumed and cannot be retrieved.

Expert-level cleric villagers have a 50% chance to buy 9 glass bottles for one emerald as part of their trade.
Expert-level cleric villagers have a 23 chance to buy 9 glass bottles for one emerald.

Java Edition:

Java Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Glass Bottle" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.