A golden apple is a food item that bestows beneficial effects when consumed, and is also used to cure a zombie villager under the Weakness effect into a normal villager.

On the base of ancient_city/city_center/city_center_2, a single golden apple is contained in the chest. Eating it at that location unlocks the piston doors to the redstone labs beneath.

To eat a golden apple, press and hold use while it is selected in the hotbar. It restores 4 () points of hunger and 9.6 hunger saturation.
Unlike most foods, golden apples can be eaten when the hunger bar is full.
The golden apple provides: 

Absorption I for 2 minutes (providing 4 points of absorption health)
Regeneration II (1 every 25 ticks,   0.4 per second) for 5 seconds (long enough to heal 4 points of damage)

A golden apple and a potion of weakness can be used to convert a zombie villager into a regular villager.

Golden apples can be used for improving the chances of taming a horse by 10%, for breeding and leading horses, and for speeding up the growth of baby horses by 4 minutes.

Piglins are attracted to golden apples. They run toward any golden apples on the ground, and inspect it for 6 to 8 seconds before putting it in their inventory. However, piglins do not eat golden apples (or any food).

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Golden Apple" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

The Golden Apple found in the Woodland Mansion tree room's chest sometimes turns into a Golden Apple enchanted with Efficiency I. It is unknown at the moment how this happens but it seems to happen after rejoining the world. It has reported to happen in Bedrock Edition.

Prior to Java Edition Beta 1.8, the golden apple outwardly restored the player's full 20  10 health points; Internally however, it is set to restore over double that, at 42  21 health points. This is most likely a reference to The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, making it restore (the meaning of) life, 42 (health points). This is far before either the Absorption or Health Boost effects, causing this reference go unnoticed.