An ink sac is an item dropped by a squid upon death used to create black dye, dark prismarine, and books and quills.

A squid drops one to three ink sacs upon death. The maximum amount is increased by 1 per level of Looting, for a maximum of 1 to 6 with Looting III.

Ink sacs can be obtained as a "junk" item from fishing. The Luck of the Sea enchantment decreases the chance.

Wandering traders sometimes sell 3 ink sacs for an emerald in Bedrock Edition. Apprentice level librarians also buy 5 ink sacs for one emerald.

In Bedrock Edition, ink sacs can be also used in banner patterns:

In Bedrock Edition and Minecraft Education, ink sac can be:

Applied to sheep to dye their wool, which can then be sheared for 13 blocks of black wool.
Applied to tamed wolves and cats to dye their collars.
Used to dye or stain wool, carpets, candles, leather armor, leather horse armor, wolf armor, beds, glass, glass panes, terracotta, shulker boxes, and bundles.
Combined with gunpowder to make a firework star.
Combined with a firework star to create a fade-to-color effect.
Used to add patterns to banners.
Used to dye shulkers in Bedrock Edition and Minecraft Education.
Used to dye water contained in cauldrons in Bedrock Edition and Minecraft Education.
Combined with sand and gravel to craft concrete powder.
Combined with compounds to craft balloons or glow sticks in Bedrock Edition and Minecraft Education.
Used to change the color of the text on signs or hanging signs.
Each type of dark prismarine can be crafted using varying amounts of 8 prismarine shards.

Journeyman-level librarian villagers have a 23 chance to buy five ink sacs for an emerald. They always offer the trade in Bedrock Edition.

Ink sacs can be applied to signs or hanging signs to revert glowing text back to default.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Note: Ink sacs can no longer be used as a dye in Java Edition.

Issues relating to "Ink Sac" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.