Pottery sherds are a set of twenty-three items used to craft decorated pots with ornamental designs. They can be obtained only by brushing suspicious blocks, with the variants of sherd obtainable being dependent on the structure.

When a decorated pot is broken with a pickaxe, axe, shovel, hoe or sword that is not enchanted with Silk Touch, it drops all of the pottery sherds and bricks used to craft it.

Pottery sherds can be found as suspicious block loot in trail ruins, ocean ruins, desert pyramids and desert wells, and can be extracted from these blocks using a brush.

Different pottery sherds have different symbols or depictions of mobs, items, locations, etc. The list is as follows:

Angler: Depicts a fishing bobber
Archer: Depicts a bow
Arms Up: Shows a person with his arms up
Blade: Depicts a sword
Brewer: Depicts a potion
Burn: Depicts fire
Danger: Depicts a creeper
Explorer: Depicts an Explorer Map; the pixel X marks treasure
Flow: Depicts a gust of wind
Friend: Shows a face of a villager or an iron golem
Guster: Depicts a breeze
Heart: Shows a heart
Heartbreak: Shows a heartbreak
Howl: Depicts a wolf (a removed howl sound)
Miner: Depicts a pickaxe
Mourner: Depicts a warden
Plenty: Depicts a treasure chest
Prize: Shows a diamond or a gem
Scrape: Depicts an axe
Sheaf: Shows a campfire
Shelter: Shows a tree
Skull: Depicts a skeleton skull
Snort: Depicts a sniffer

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Pottery Sherd" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Many pottery sherds are based on another in-game mob or item:
The angler pottery sherd depicts a fishing rod.
The archer pottery sherd depicts a bow and arrow.
The blade pottery sherd depicts a sword.
The brewer pottery sherd depicts a potion.
The burn pottery sherd depicts fire.
The danger pottery sherd depicts a creeper.
The explorer pottery sherd depicts a map.
The friend pottery sherd depicts the unibrow and nose of a villager or iron golem.
The howl pottery sherd depicts a wolf.
The miner pottery sherd depicts a pickaxe.
The mourner pottery sherd depicts an early design for the warden.
The plenty pottery sherd depicts a chest.
The sheaf pottery sherd depicts wheat.
The skull pottery sherd depicts a skeleton.
The snort pottery sherd depicts a sniffer.
The prize pottery sherd depicts a diamond cut diamond
It could depict a ruby from Minecraft Earth, as well.
The arms up pottery sherd depicts a character with their arms up.
The heart and heartbreak pottery sherds depict a heart and broken heart respectively.
The shelter pottery sherd depicts a tree.