A saddle is an item required to ride pigs and striders or control ridden camels, horses, donkeys, and mules.

(This is changed in Chase the Skies game drop, since they are now craftable. However, the village chest loot remains untouched.)

Saddles can be obtained as a "treasure" item from fishing with a base chance (without fishing rod enchantments) of 0.8%.

Master-level leatherworker villagers have a 50% chance to sell a saddle for 6 emeralds as their trade. This trade is always offered in Java Edition.

Any mob that the player equips with a saddle drops the saddle upon death.
A strider may spawn being ridden by a zombified piglin, which causes it to spawn wearing a saddle. This saddle always drops when the strider is killed.
A ravager always spawns with a saddle and always drops the saddle upon death. Looting does not affect the drop.

While camels, horses, donkeys, mules, and skeleton horses can always be ridden, a saddle is required to control them. These mobs (only after being tamed, in the case of equine mobs) can be equipped with a saddle by placing it in their inventory, which can be opened by pressing use while holding a saddle or sneaking. The saddle can be unequipped by removing it from  the specific inventory slot, or using a pair of shears.
Saddles are required to ride pigs and striders, but even with a saddle their movement cannot be controlled like other mobs. A carrot on a stick (for pigs) or a warped fungus on a stick (for striders) is required to direct these mobs. Using a saddle on one of these mobs equips them with the saddle, and, since they have no inventory, there is no way to retrieve the saddle without killing the mob.
Animals can also be equipped with saddles by a dispenser.
Although ravagers appear equipped with saddles and sometimes ridden by other mobs, players are unable to ride ravagers. Ravagers' saddles cannot be sheared off.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Saddle" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

A saddle is considered "armor" by the game, but the value of protection to the animal is zero.
A saddle on a pig can still be seen if the pig is afflicted with Invisibility.
When riding a saddled mob, the hunger bar is replaced by hearts (representing the mounted mob's health) resembling the look of the saddle.
The saddle was not able to be crafted until the update 1.21.6

Transportation