A totem of undying is an uncommon combat item that can save holders from death. It is dropped by evokers, which spawn in woodland mansions and raids.

Evokers always drop one totem of undying upon death. The drop rate is not affected by Looting.

If the player is holding a totem of undying in their off-hand or main-hand slot and receives otherwise fatal damage, the totem saves the player from death. The totem of undying must be in the player's hand (main hand or offhand) for it to workit does not work if it is in the hotbar, unless selected. Any mob that can hold a totem of undying (in a hand or in the mouth) can use it while holding it. The totem can be used only once; it disappears after use. It does not save the player from death caused by void damage, the /kill commands or even a tipped arrow with harming effect damage.

When activated, the totem of undying restores 1, removes all existing status effects, then grants 45 seconds of Regeneration II, 40 seconds of Fire Resistance I and 5 seconds of Absorption II. An animation shows the totem of undying appearing to hover in front of the player's screen, similar to the animation seen when a player receives the Bad Omen or Hero of the Village effect or encounters an elder guardian. When killed by an Instant Damage tipped arrow, the arrow's instant damage takes effect after the totem has been activated.
The totem of undying also works in Hardcore mode.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Totem of Undying" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

If a mob holds a totem of undying, the mob also resurrects upon death and the sound effect plays. However, the animation does not appear.
In the New Nintendo 3DS Edition, the totem of undying can be put in any hotbar slot to activate it, due to the lack of an off-hand slot in that version.
Being able to obtain totems of undying in raids without exploring woodland mansions is considered a "massive game play design flaw" by Mojang.