Wheat seeds (in Java Edition) or seeds (in Bedrock Edition) are items obtained by breaking grass, or more abundantly harvested from wheat crops, and are used to plant them.
Wheat crops are planted in farmland and used to grow wheat and wheat seeds. 

Harvesting fully-grown wheat crops yields from 1 to 4 seeds per crop harvested (about 2 57 seeds/crop harvested on average).
In Bedrock edition yields are 0-3.[1]
Wheat seeds can be obtained from breaking all variants of grass, which yields 0 to 1 seed. If harvested with a Fortune enchanted tool the drop rate from grass is increased.
The looting is calculated by a binomial distribution: a drop is attempted three times with a success rate of around 57% to yield the 03 drops. Each level of Fortune enchantment increases the number of attempts by one.

Village farm plots have a chance of being wheat crops. The exact chance depends on the style of the village:

Wandering traders sell wheat seeds for an emerald.

                                                                           
Nitwit and unemployed villagers throw wheat seeds at players under the Hero of the Village effect.

Wheat seeds can be placed on farmland by right-clicking, where they grow through eight stages. When left alone, wheat seeds planted on farmland grow to become wheat crops, which can be harvested by the player. Planted seeds require a light level of 9 or greater to continue growing. If the light level is 7 or below, the crops instantly un-plant themselves ("pop off"). It is not possible to plant seeds if the light level is too low.
Crops grow faster if the farmland they are planted in is hydrated. Using bone meal on crops also increases the speed of growth by randomly increasing their growth stage by 2 to 5.
Breaking the final stage produces 1 to 4 wheat seeds (or more with Fortune) and 1 wheat. If they are harvested early, they drop 1 seed without any wheat. Crops break if pushed by a piston or if their supporting farmland breaks or turns to dirt (i.e. by being trampled), dropping their usual drops. 

Like other seeds, wheat seeds can be used to breed chickens and reduce the remaining growth duration of baby chickens by 10%. Chickens also follow a player holding wheat seeds.

Like other seeds, wheat seeds can be used to tame parrots.

Placing wheat seeds into a composter has a 30% chance of raising the compost level by 1. A stack of wheat seeds yields an average of 2.74 bonemeal.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

For a more in-depth breakdown of changes to wheat textures and models, including a set of renders for each state, see /Asset history

The following content is transcluded from Technical blocks/Crops.

Java Edition
Item names did not exist prior to Beta 1.0.

Beta 1.0 - 13w36b: Crops

Issues relating to "Wheat Seeds" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Java Edition

Bedrock Edition