Glazed terracotta is a vibrant solid block that comes in the sixteen regular dye colors, obtained by smelting colored terracotta. Glazed terracotta does not stick to slime blocks or honey blocks, and it cannot be pulled by sticky pistons, but it can be pushed by pistons.

Glazed terracotta requires a pickaxe to be mined. When mined without a pickaxe, it drops nothing.

Purple glazed terracotta generates in some cold underwater ruins.
Yellow glazed terracotta generates in mason houses in savanna villages.
Orange glazed terracotta generates in savanna village armorer houses.
White glazed terracotta generates in some desert village buildings.
Lime glazed terracotta generates in one of the desert village temples.
Light blue glazed terracotta generates in toolsmith houses in desert villages.
All types of glazed terracotta except green, magenta, and pink generate in trail ruins.

Glazed Terracotta can be obtained by smelting any stained terracotta. Unstained terracotta cannot be smelted.

Expert-level stone mason villagers sell 1 glazed terracotta for an emerald as part of their trades.

Glazed terracotta does not stick to slime blocks, and honey blocks, but unlike immovable blocks, it can be pushed by pistons and sticky pistons. It cannot be pulled by sticky pistons.

When placed, glazed terracotta's texture rotates relative to the direction the player is facing while placing the block. If several glazed terracotta blocks of the same color are placed in the "correct" orientation in a 22 or greater area, the textures align to create a singular image, as demonstrated in the image to the right.
The magenta glazed terracotta pattern includes an arrow () design that can be used to point to things or direct players. A guide is shown below, in order to correctly place the arrow direction (based on testing). 

Glazed Terracotta blocks are designed to form a larger, cohesive pattern when placed in the correct 22 configuration. Most textures have reflection symmetry along a diagonal line that goes from corner to corner, though the colors of individual pixels can differ slightly.
Although the design of each individual glazed terracotta block is up for interpretation, there are some intentional details in certain blocks:

Magenta blocks contain directional arrows.
Cyan blocks contain a creeper's face.
Purple blocks contain the hilt and handguard of a sword.

All types of glazed terracotta can be placed under note blocks to produce "bass drum" sound.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

 
Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Glazed Terracotta" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

According to Jeb, the inspiration for glazed terracotta blocks came from a Moroccan-styled bathroom floor at a hotel in California.
Glazed terracotta blocks were designed by Johan Aronson.

Block of the Week: Glazed Terracotta  Minecraft.net on January 19, 2018