A zombie nautilus is an undead neutral mob that will be added in Mounts of Mayhem. It is an undead variant of the nautilus and is always ridden by drowned, forming a zombie nautilus jockey. It was revealed in Minecraft Live - September 2025.

Zombie nautili have two unique variants: the normal variant and the coral variant.
Normal zombie nautilus variants spawn in most ocean biomes, while coral zombie nautilus variants spawn in warm ocean biomes. Zombie nautili generally sometimes spawn with a drowned riding on it, forming a Zombie Nautilus Jockey. Zombie nautilus jockies always appear hostile.
When the drowned rider is killed, the zombie nautilus becomes neutral.
Zombie nautili do not spawn in peaceful difficulty, like all undead mobs.

Zombie nautiluses drop 1 to 3 experience orbs and rotten flesh upon death by a player or tamed wolf.

Like nautiluses, zombie nautiluses use their mouths to propel forward. When they are harmed by a player, they use their dash attack to propel forward and inflict damage on the player.
Unlike nautiluses, zombie nautiluses can survive on land instead of suffocating.
Unlike nautiluses, zombie nautiluses cannot be bred, as they do not have their baby variants. However, they can be tamed and saddled.

A zombie nautilus jockey is an undead hostile jockey consisting of a drowned riding a zombie nautilus, making it hostile. It has a 50% chance of spawning.

Like any undead mobs, zombie nautili:

Are damaged by Instant Health and healed by Instant Damage;
Are not affected by Regeneration and Poison;
Take extra damage from Smite enchantment.
Burns in sunlight (when on land)
Are not targeted by the wither.
Causes an armadillo to hide in its shell.
Unlike most undead mobs, zombie nautili are not targeted by iron golems and snow golems. However, zombie nautilus jockey riders are targeted.

Unlike nautili, zombie nautili appear in a dark, sea green colour and a greyish-tan colored cracked shell, with green plant (kelp or seagrass) stuck to it.
Coral zombie nautili variants share a similar appearance with their normal variants, except with corals stuck or grown on their shells.

Advancements that apply to all mobs:

Issues relating to "Zombie Nautilus" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.