A huge fungus is a large "tree" structure that generates in the Nether. There are two types of huge fungi: the huge crimson fungus and the huge warped fungus.

Huge crimson fungi and huge warped fungi generate in crimson forests and warped forests, respectively. Huge fungi only generate naturally in their corresponding biome.

The trunks of huge fungi are made of either warped stems or crimson stems depending on the type. Huge fungus trunks can be either thick or thin: thick trunks grow up in a 33-plus shape, with stray stems sometimes in the corners, while thin trunks grow straight up as a 11 column. To determine the size of huge fungi, a random integer is chosen between 4 and 13 [inclusive]. There is then a 112 chance of that integer doubling. The resulting value is the height of the trunk. A layer of wart blocks and shroomlights is then spread around the trunk, being able to generate up to 3 blocks out from the trunk, and are the "leaves" of the fungus. There is a 332 hollow ring that surrounds the lowest block of a fungus where no blocks generate. Both variants have shroomlights generate inside them, both replacing the wart blocks and stems. Huge crimson fungi may also have weeping vines growing replacing the same, or from the underside of wart blocks. In this way huge crimson fungi may grow the weeping vines lower than the stems as well as initially generate replacing the stems, when naturally-generated uniquely along the local ceiling.

When bone meal is used on a fungus that is planted on matching nylium, this has a 40% chance to grow into its huge equivalent (similar to saplings and mushrooms). Crimson and warped fungi grow into crimson and warped huge fungi, respectively. The stem, shroomlight, or nether wart block may replace certain blocks including slabs and torches.
A fungus does not grow by itself through random ticks, unlike saplings.
Huge fungi grow even with blocks above them, and do not replace any solid blocks when grown; however, they do not grow if blocked by the world height limit, or if situated outside of the world.
Huge fungi can grow up to 27 blocks tall. The maximum space they can take up is 9279 blocks (partially hollow), and the average is 213 blocks of volume.
Nether wart blocks and shroomlight persist when the stem of the huge fungus is removed, unlike how leaves decay when logs of a tree are removed.

Issues relating to "Huge Fungi", "Huge Crimson Fungi", or "Huge Warped Fungi" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Tutorials/Huge fungus generation: a more detailed and advanced look on huge fungus generation.