The exit portal (also known as the end podium or end fountain) is a feature that enables the player to return to their spawn point, activating upon each defeat of the ender dragon.

The exit portal always generates at the coordinates 0,0 in the End, and is de-activated whenever an ender dragon fight is in progress. The y-level of the portal is determined by the height of the terrain, placing the portal blocks at the y-level of the highest block found at 0,0. If the exit portal spawns at the top of the world, the portal blocks are the highest blocks generated, with the top 3 blocks of the bedrock pillar failing to generate due to the maximum build height having been reached. If there are no blocks at 0,0, then the portal generates out of bounds, and only the top 3 blocks of the bedrock pillar generate.

The exit portal looks similar to the end portal but differs in its design. Instead of a frame of end portal frame blocks, it has a 7-block wide bowl-shaped frame of bedrock, and a central pillar of bedrock with a torch on each side. A dragon egg generates atop the pillar upon defeating the ender dragon for the first time.
There are 16 end stone blocks, one under each outer bedrock block, as well as four torches. If any of the blocks are removed, they regenerate when the ender dragon is defeated or respawned. (Note: the torches are attached to the central second-to-the-top block of bedrock)

The portal returns the player to their spawn point. Upon respawning, all effects are removed from the player. The credits roll when a player enters the exit portal for the first time. 
If an entity other than a player goes through, like a falling block or a thrown item, it is sent to the world spawn. 
If a player dies above the portal (for example by flying into the bedrock column with enough momentum) the player goes through. If this happens, the player's items return to the world spawn point.

Issues relating to "Exit portal" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

In Bedrock Edition, if the player manages to break all of the end portal blocks in the exit portal, the entire structure regenerates after 5 seconds.
If all of the portal blocks have end crystals above (so the fire constantly eliminates the portal), this regeneration process repeats until a portal block successfully regenerates.
If the exit portal generates at the tallest possible height and the ender dragon is defeated, the portal blocks generate in the exit portal as normal, but the dragon egg does not spawn due to its intended location surpassing the build height limit.
It is possible for the exit portal to not generate at all. If no blocks generates below x=0, z=0, The exit portal would fail to generate due to it being cut by the void, with the only thing that generates is the small pillar.
In Bedrock Edition, if there are other end portal blocks in the End and the exit portal structure is completely destroyed, it does not regenerate until the other end portal blocks are removed.