Buried treasure is a naturally generated structure that consists of a buried loot chest. The chest is buried primarily in beaches, and rarely in the ocean floor. Buried treasure is the only source of the heart of the sea, which can be used to craft a conduit. Buried treasure can be located using explorer maps.

Buried treasures generate in beach biomes, and can also generate underwater.
The treasure chest is almost always buried by some material. Most of the time the chest generates buried in a beach, so it has a sand or gravel block covering it. Sometimes, if generated on the side of an underwater hill, it spawns with stone blocks covering it. If it generates on the surface of the ocean floor, a gravel or a sand block covers it. Nonetheless, terrain generation can cause the chest to be buried by any suitable terrain-generated blocks, such as coal ore and diorite.
In Java Edition, buried treasure always generates at chunk coordinate 9 (out of 0 through 15) on both the X and Z axis, and are always facing east.
In Bedrock Edition, buried treasure always generates at chunk coordinate 8 (out of 0 through 15) on the X and Z axis.

Buried treasures contain a single chest full of various loot. If the chest is exposed to water, it generates waterlogged.

A heart of the sea is always present in every buried treasure.
In Java Edition, each buried treasure chest contains  items drawn from 6 pools,  with the following distribution: 

In Bedrock Edition, each buried treasure chest contains  items drawn from 2 pools,  with the following distribution: 

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Issues relating to "Buried Treasure" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Buried treasures are the smallest naturally-occurring structure in the game.
In Java Edition, the player arrow is shown under the X of the treasure, but in Bedrock Edition, the player arrow is shown on top of the X.
In Java Edition, the buried treasure contains the highest number of diamonds per chest among all generated structures, at an average of 1.25 diamonds per chest, while the end city only has an average of 1.06 diamonds per chest.