This tutorial shows how to run the data generator that is included in Java Edition client and server distributions since 1.13.


== Purpose ==
The data generator can:

Convert G-Zip compressed NBT format files with .nbt extensions (as used in Structure files) from and to String NBT format files with .snbt extensions.
Generate all contents of the vanilla data pack
Create JSON reports of all block states, all registries, and the full vanilla command tree


== Getting Started ==
To launch the data generator, it is recommended that you download the official server distribution of the Minecraft version you desire.
Then, open a bash or command prompt in the directory where you have the server jar, and run (make sure you have Java installed)
java -DbundlerMainClass=net.minecraft.data.Main -jar server.jar
If you have set up correctly, the command line will show a list of options and descriptions.


== Generating data pack contents ==
In the same command line interface, run
java -DbundlerMainClass=net.minecraft.data.Main -jar server.jar --server
The contents of the vanilla data pack (except pack.mcmeta) will be generated to generated directory in the run directory of the command line interface.


== Generating stringified server DAT files ==
Many of the server data files located in the world directory of the game server bear the .dat extension.  Many of these files are actually saved in Named Binary Tag (NBT) format used widely throughout Minecraft.  Follow these steps to use the data generator tools distributed with the Minecraft server JAR to convert these files to a human-readable "stringified" format:

Open a terminal or command prompt of your choice on your game server
Create a new directory named input in the same directory as your game server JAR
Copy any qualifying .dat file which is actually written in NBT format into the input directory you created and re-save it with the .nbt extension
Use the --dev flag to activate the development generator which is capable of converting a directory of NBT files into a directory of "stringified" NBT (SNBT) files 

If it worked, you'll get some output that looks like thisYou should also have a new directory named generated in the current directory where you ran the command.  Inside will be the stringified version of each file you supplied as input.
Use command-line tools of your choice (e.g. cat on linux systems) to view them immediately, or use a GUI text editor of your choice to open them


=== Stringify all DAT files: ===
If you'd like to stringify every DAT file currently on your server (for experimentation, curiosity, or whatever):

For Linux:

Start from the same directory where your input directory is located, then run this command to recursively copy all the DAT files into it. Replace path/to/world/data with the relative path to the directory holding the world data in your game server.  By default, Minecraft creates this directory in the same directory as the server JAR, and names it world.  Unless you've changed the world name in server.json or moved this directory somewhere else, you can probably just replace that entire path with world
Rename all of these files with the .nbt extension:
Re-run the data generator with the --dev flag as described above in step 4 under "Generating stringified server DAT files".
For Windows:

Start from the same directory where your input directory is located, then run this command to copy all files in the save's folder with the .dat extension into the input folder, replacing .dat with .nbt. Replace path\to\world\data with the relative path to the directory holding the world data in your game server.  By default, Minecraft creates this directory in the same directory as the server JAR, and names it world.  Unless you've changed the world name in server.json or moved this directory somewhere else, you can probably just replace that entire path with world
Re-run the data generator with the --dev flag as described above in step 4 under "Generating stringified server DAT files".


== References ==


== See also ==
Data pack
Tutorials/Installing a data pack