This tutorial will teach the player how to build a magma cube farm. They can often be difficult to make, partially because of the fact that water cannot be placed in the Nether without commands.


== Differences from slimes ==
A magma cube farm is rather similar to a slime farm, meaning that if you've made a slime farm, making a magma cube farm should be a little easier than it would be otherwise. The following is a list of the differences between the two farms:

Differently-made spawning areas
Portal rooms
Fall damage will not harm magma cubes
Water cannot be placed in the Nether
Tiny cubes can harm the player
May need to filter out other mobs


== Magma cube spawner trap ==


=== Disabling ===

There is always a magma cube spawner in each bastion remnant of the treasure room type. It is located close to the bottom of the large room, above a lava pool, guarding the ultimate treasure: a pile of gold blocks, and a chest. Most players would just easily disable the spawner by breaking it, as magma cubes spawn at any light level, torches won't do anything, and it takes a lot of time and blocks to fill up the entire 9×3x9 spawning area, enough time for the local piglins, piglin brutes and magma cubes to tear you into pieces. However, there exist a simple way to disable a magma cube spawner entirely and reliably, using as little as 9 blocks.
This disabling grid makes use of the mechanic that a magma cube, no matter large, medium or small, checks for the space requirements of a large magma cube before it spawns. Since a large magma cube is slightly wider than 2 blocks, there is no horizontal space within the 9×3x9 area for it to fit in. Also, a spawner can only spawn a mob's "feet" at 3 heights: one block below the spawner, same height as the spawner, or one block above the spawner. No matter which layer it chooses, even the lowest layer, since a large magma cube is slightly taller than 2 blocks, its "head" will slightly intersect with at least one of the solid blocks, cancelling the spawn attempt.