Leaves are natural blocks that generate as part of trees. Despite being a full block, they can be waterlogged.

Hoes are the default tools for breaking leaves, but leaves can be obtained only with shears or Silk Touch enchanted tools.

Leaves occur naturally on trees and azaleas throughout the Overworld. Specially, oak leaves are generate in jungle bushes. Oak leaves also generate in the tree at meeting point in plains village. Dark oak leaves also generate in woodland mansions.

Leaves generate as part of trees grown from saplings or azalea.

Leaves from trees spontaneously decay (disappear) when they receive a block tick if they are not connected to a block with the logs tag (log or wood block), either directly or via other leaf blocks, with a maximum distance of 6 blocks or 4 blocks. Leaves placed by players never decay.
Leaves that decay, or are destroyed without using Silk Touch or shears, yield saplings 5% (120) of the time, sticks 2% of the time, and otherwise drop nothing. Jungle leaves drop saplings 2.5% (140) of the time. Oak and dark oak leaves also have a separate but additional 0.5% (1200) chance of dropping an apple, making it extremely rare but possible for a single leaf to drop a sapling, a stick and an apple at the same time. Rates are increased by the Fortune enchantment. Leaves that are burned do not yield saplings or apples.
Leaves take on a different shade of green depending on the biome in which they are placed.
Leaves are always transparent to light, but cannot be seen through when the graphics mode is set to "Fast"; the transparent regions are instead black/dark green. They diffuse sky light, causing the shadows they cast under trees.
Leaves can be waterlogged, despite being a full block. Water does not spread out and waterlogged leaves follow the same rules as any other waterlogged block. When concrete powder is placed on any side of the waterlogged leaves it turns into concrete, without the danger of the water running out of the block.
Applying bone meal to mangrove leaves with a space beneath produces a hanging mangrove propagule with age=0.

                                                                           
The state of a leaves blockincluding a player-placed blockchanges after 1 game tick (half a redstone tick) when the distance to the nearest log or wood block changes, up to 6 blocks of leaves away. Observers facing away from the leaves detect this change and transmit a redstone signal in the same game tick, making leaves useful for redstone signal transmission. This has been called "Leafstone" by the Minecraft Community.

Leaves are destroyed when pushed by pistons. They do not stick to sticky pistons, slime blocks or honey blocks.

Leaves have a 30% chance of increasing the compost level in a composter by 1. A stack of leaves yields an average of 2.74 bonemeal.

Flowering azaleas leaves and cherry leaves function like any other flowers in their interaction and uses with bees.

Oak and birch trees grown from saplings that are within 2 blocks of any flowering azalea leaves have a 5% chance to grow with bee nest and 1-3 bees in it.

In the inventory,  oak,  jungle,  acacia, and  dark oak leaves are colored  #48b518.
In the inventory,  mangrove leaves are colored  #92c648.
 Spruce leaves are colored  #619961, and are not affected by biome or inventory color.
 Birch leaves are colored  #80a755, and are not affected by biome or inventory color.
 Azalea,  flowering azalea,  cherry leaves and  pale oak leaves are not colored.

These values are generated by the biome dyeing algorithm. See Biome colors for more information.

Unused biomes in Bedrock Edition.

                                                                           

Leaves appear as snow-covered during snowfall, however, these appearances are exclusive to frozen ocean, deep frozen ocean, frozen river, snowy beach, snowy plains, and snowy taiga biomes and their variants. Leaves are snow-covered only during snowfalls when fancy graphics are enabled. In mountains biomes and variants leaves do not become frost covered during snowfall.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:
Leaves:

Leaves2:

Azalea leaves and flowering azalea leaves:

Issues relating to "Leaves" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Occasionally, leaves grow through other blocks, acting as though they are still connected to the tree. They may also completely replace blocks they try to grow into.
Leaves do not prevent chests from being opened.
Some trees seem to occasionally drop apples or saplings without being destroyed due to creation of leaf blocks not supported by logs.
The frost texture in Bedrock Edition is not an instant transition. Instead, the leaves slowly shift from their original color to the frosty one.

Java Edition

Bedrock Edition

Graphics mode is set to "Fast" in Java Edition

Graphics mode is set to "Fast" in Bedrock Edition

Snowy leaves

Block of the Week: Leaves  Minecraft.net on August 18, 2017