A micro shelter is a compact shelter that fits a large amount of utilities in a minimal amount of space. It can be built very quickly, and requires very few supplies to build.

It is similar to the micro shelter, but is updated and have space for an anvil.

14 (if you have a glass pane or have no glass at all) or 13 (if you have a glass block) solid blocks of your choice
4 slabs of your choice
1-2 chest(s)
1 furnace
1 crafting table
1 anvil
1 door
shovel (optional)
glass block or glass pane (optional)

Dig a 1 by 2 hole.
2. Place a bed beside the hole.

3. Place the chests below the bed.

4. Place a slab in front of the chest.

5. Place a crafting table and an anvil beside the slab.

6. Place the solid blocks as the walls. Also place the doors.

7. Place the torch on the wall.

8. Place the furnace on the roof in the way that it can be accessed outside, see picture. Or you can place the furnace above your head when you're standing on the slab inside.

9. Place the slabs as roof.

10. (Optional) Place the glass as the window. If you use a pane, you must place a block beside it to close the gap.

This is an updated version of the "staircase-style" that is resistant to being set on fire by lightning strikes.

14 solid blocks, 13 if you have glass (wood recommended)
2 temporary blocks (optional, dirt recommended)
2 chests
1 slab of any kind (wood recommended) and 12 (cobble)stone slabs.
1 bed
1 crafting table
12 or more torches
glass (optional)
shovel (optional)
pickaxe (optional)

1.  Dig a 2x2x2 hole with an extra 1x1 hole for easy access.

2. Place 2 temporary blocks on the bottom of the hole.
3. Place the bed on top of the temporary blocks.

4. Mine the temporary blocks and replace them with chests.
5. Place one bottom slab on the floor beside the chests.

6. While sneaking on the slab place the crafting table, furnace, and a torch on top of the furnace.
7. Fill in the 1x1 access hole.

8. While standing on the bed place the door on the same side of the bed that the crafting table and furnace is on.
9. Build a 2x2 wall around the structure with the solid blocks, do not place any blocks at the corners to conserve resources.
10. Make a roof using all 12 of the (cobble)stone slabs, be sure to cover both the door and all the walls.

11. Optional - place glass to make a window. 
12. Optional - place torches on the outside walls of the shelter to discourage hostile mob spawning at night.

This is called "Staircase-style" as navigating around the house feels like going up and down like stairs.

14 (13 if you have glass) solid blocks (wood is recommended)
7 slabs (any kind)
1 door
1 bed
1 furnace
1-2 chest(s)
1 crafting table
1 torch
shovel (optional)
glass or glass pane (optional)

Dig a 222 hole in the ground.
Place 2 blocks across the hole at the lower layer (the lowest layer possible without breaking any other blocks, NOT the floor of the hole)
Place a bed above those blocks.
Place a crafting table and a furnace towards where you want to place the door. Make sure that the furnace is above the crafting table, for lighting in case bad things happen to the torch.
Add a torch above the furnace. You must sneak to do so.
Mine the block at the lower layer of the hole, then place a chest. Also place another chest beside it if you have two.
Place a top slab above the chest(s).
Place a bottom slab in front of the chest.
Place the door in front of the torch (away from the bed of course). Make sure to place from the inside.
Place 2 high blocks (as walls) around the house. Don't place at the corners, to conserve resouces.
Add slabs as roof. Remember to place above the door. Don't place above walls, to conserve resources.

At the bare minimumusing a hoe, dirt walls, and slabs - this will take the following raw materials:

You will have 1 stick, 1 plank, and 3 torches left over if done correctly.

Mini shelters are slightly larger shelters that provides an extra anvil and some space, finally! You do spawn on the roof, but it is safe to jump off.