A woodland mansion is a massive systematically-generated structure found in dark forests, often far away from the world spawn point. A mansion is inhabited by evokers, vindicators and allays, and is one of the only places where a totem of undying can be obtained. Besides illagers, a mansion's interior lighting is sufficiently low for other Overworld monsters to spawn. Woodland mansions are massive structures found in dark forests. They are highly anticipated to explore because they are one of the only ways to find the totem of undying and the useful allay mobs, and are the only structure to contain the vex armor trim. and contain valuable loot in large quantities.

Exploring a mansion requires a lot of preparation, but not everyone has the same skills. So depending on how skilled you are, different preparations may be needed. The following is a suggested collection of equipment you might need:

 A woodland explorer map to track down the mansion.
 An iron sword at minimum. Enchantments such as Sharpness and Fire Aspect will give you an easier time fighting the illagers, while Knockback helps keep a safe distance from vindicators.
 A bow for ranged combat against evokers. Enchantments such as Power and Flame enable quicker kills, while Punch knocks the illagers back a safe distance.
 Crossbows are an alternative to bows, the choice depends on your preference, but you can bring both if you want.
 One arrow with a bow enchanted with Infinity, or a stack of 64 at minimum.
 A full set of high-durability iron armor at minimum. Protection allows you to take less damage from evocation fangs, even though evocation fangs bypass armor, and guarantee higher survivability against a vindicators ambushes.
 An iron axe or multiple gold axes for breaking through walls and revealing secret rooms, they can also be used as weapons when needed.
 Highly nutritious food, such as bread, baked potatoes or cooked meat, to help restore hunger and regenerate health.
 A shield for protection against vexes, as well as vindicators.
 A stack of 64 cobblestone, dirt or any other expendable block for quick towering, hiding, trapping mobs, etc.
 A bed to set your respawn point outside the mansion in case you die (unless you have cheats on).
 Several stacks of torches to light up the mansion and prevent common hostile mobs from spawning.

  A pair of elytra (with firework rockets) to get to the mansion as fast as possible.
 An extra sword enchanted with Smite or Bane of Arthropods allows you to kill any common hostile mobs that spawned in the mansion quicker.
 A trident enchanted with Riptide makes travel even faster during storms.
 An anvil to repair your tools (required if doing the "Here's Johnny!" tactic).
 A few golden apples for quick healing cover.
 Can be substituted for enchanted apples.
  Healing or regeneration potions for faster health recovery.
 A few strength potions for the upper hand in combat.
  A few shulker boxes and an ender chest for easier transportation of items.
 A few ender pearls for quick escape, if necessary.
  A few stacks of harming arrows or poisoned arrows for easier elimination of enemies.
 A few invisibility potions for unnoticed infiltration.
 A flint and steel, preferably enchanted with Unbreaking, if you want to burn down the mansion. The unbreaking enchantment increases the durability of your flint and steel since the mansion is huge.
 A bell can be rung to outline the evokers and vindicators nearby, giving them the Glowing effect that makes them visible through walls.
  A few blocks of iron and a few carved pumpkin to spawn Iron Golems which can be a distraction to the vindicators and evokers and assist you in battle. The iron golems won't attack you if you accidentally hit it.
 A few name tags to name a vindicator "Johnny" so other mobs in the mansion can distract it.
 A sheep and a few Blue Dyes to dye the sheep blue and using it to distract the evokers.

It is important you grab the necessary equipment to distract and kill the illagers in the mansion, don't bring items you don't need such as all your diamonds or you might lose them forever.

Your sword or axe is your primary melee weapon for eliminating vindicators or cornering evokers. Although the durability of axes decreases more rapidly when used as a weapon, critical hits deal extremely heavy, if not fatal, blows to your target, and they can also be used to punch through walls for uncovering secret rooms.

Your bow, a secondary weapon, should be used for taking out enemies from a distance if there are many gathered together. When in melee combat, it is always safer to fall back to ranged combat if youre swarmed by illagers. If you take a crossbow with you, however, make sure that an arrow has already been loaded for a faster first shot.

Armor is a must-have when exploring a mansion, because vindicators have one of the strongest direct attacks of any hostile mob, and vexes also have substantial melee damage. Iron armor should be worn at minimum, and Protection helps to reduce damage from evocation fangs that would otherwise completely bypass armor and shields.

Nutritious food, such as steak, cooked porkchops, and bread are absolutely necessary for healing after a fight. The food can also heal your hunger bar so you can sprint.

Cobblestone and dirt are the go-to expendable block for building a protective cover to heal, towering or bridging your way across. Although dirt is much easier to gather, keep in mind that its not as tough and can be destroyed by a creeper explosion. However, if evocation fangs are coming your way, use dirt instead of cobblestone to build a barrier such that you can quickly mine and escape if the fangs pass through.

A few stacks of torches provide better visibility in dark corners, and prevent common mobs such as zombies, skeletons etc. from spawning.

Used to break your fall. Necessary for all missions, no matter the difficulty.

A shield (or two for backup) is recommended for a mansion venture because it can be used to block melee attacks. Just be more careful when using a shield against vindicators, as their axe attacks can disable it.

The main way to locate a woodland mansion without cheats. Woodland explorer maps can be obtained from cartographer villagers.

As mansions are typically thousands of blocks away, a pair of elytra combined with firework rockets will suffice for a speedier and more efficient journey to the mansion. Just make sure youve packed enough phantom membranes for repair, or enchanted the elytra with Unbreaking (and possibly Mending) for it to last longer.

Powerful illager attacks can bring you to a vulnerable state at times, so golden apples, healing potions and regeneration potions will come in handy for a swift healing cover. Enchanted apples can heal you more than regular ones, but since they are extremely rare, use them sparingly if you get your hands on some.
If you do obtain a Totem of Undying by killing an evoker, do place it in your left hand slot as soon as possible, as shields arent as useful against Vindicators as their axes disable shields. 

Potions enhance your performance, which can be highly beneficial although not necessary. Strength potions can give you the edge in combat, while invisibility potions can allow you to sneak into loot rooms given that youre unarmored. 

These make transportation of loot much easier, as mansions are sometimes very far, often thousands of blocks apart. You should pack backup gear in the ender chest, which you can place at the mansions entrance along with a bed, such that if you die, youll be able to respawn at your ender chest and quickly ready yourself and rescue your items. Bring at least 6 shulker boxes and put them in your ender chest. Bring a silk touch pickaxe to pick up the ender chest. There is a lot of loot and most of the furniture can be dismantled for additional blocks. You will want a way to store them, and you don't want to clutter your inventory. Diamond hoes, chestplates, and totems of undying are non-stackable and can take up a lot of space in your inventory.

Ender pearls can be used for quick travel across mansion floors, or escaping from a crowd of illagers. On the journey, if your elytra breaks while you are flying, throw an ender pearl to the ground to break your fall.

                                                                           
Bells are normally used in villages during raids, where they give the Glowing effect to raiders, making them easier to locate. This glowing effect doesn't just apply during a raid - it applies to all raid mobs, including vindicators and evokers, under all circumstances. Bringing a bell to the mansion can help you see these two dangerous mobs through walls at a distance of 32 blocks, so you can have a better idea of their exact locations, as well as to confirm whether an area is completely cleared of illagers or not.

Using the "Here's Johnny!" tactic, you can easily distract the vindicators and kill them easier. To do this you need an anvil or if you already have an anvil back at your base, name them "Johnny" (without quotes) before you go to the mansion.  
Once you got the name tags, find a vindicator with hostile mobs to the vindicator. Once that is complete, name the vindicator "Johnny" with one of your name tags it'll attack all non illager mobs in the area. The point of this is not to make the vindicator do your dirty work, but to distract it on another mob so you can kill it without it coming towards you. 

You can bring a iron golem from a village or make your own, but it is suggested that you make the iron golem yourself as they won't retaliate if hit by you unlike the naturally spawned golem. It's also hard to move the iron golem across rivers and trees if you decide to steal one from a village, so it is ill-advised to do so as it could die along the way. 
Iron golems can assist you in battle against the illagers or distract them, and if the iron golem survives the battle, you can use Iron Ingots to repair it for another room. It is also advised the you make the iron golem before you enter combat as you will often die trying to make it in time. 
Use leads to move the iron golem around or lure mobs into the iron golem's sight so the iron golem will attack it.  Keep on repeating this process until you can't find any more illagers in the mansion. After that, you can loot the mansion, turn it into your base, or burn it down.

Bringing a sheep from a nearby village or finding one around the mansion can be good for distracting evokers. Bring some blue dyes so you can dye the sheep blue. Bring the sheep in the mansion when you see an evoker. Dyeing the sheep blue can provide a distraction to the evoker and gives it a cooldown time before it could summon anything else. 
To move the sheep around, either hold wheat to make it follow you or use a lead if you have one. When you see an evoker you can bring the blue sheep and your blue dyes to the evoker. Make sure you dye your sheep blue before you approach the evoker, as it sees a normal sheep it might do a fang attack instead, hurting both you and your sheep. If the evoker sees the blue sheep it will dye it red, giving you time to dye the sheep blue again and hit the evoker a couple times while it is still on its cooldown. 
Do this to every evoker until all the evokers in the mansion is dead, then you can take any vindicators you see in the mansion. Don't worry too much about vindicators killing your sheep, since they will attack you instead of the sheep. Make sure you know where your sheep is before you die in case if you die it wanders out of the mansion or it gets lost in a corridor.

In the majority of worlds, a mansion is typically thousands of blocks from the spawn point, requiring a long journey. Use the following advice to embark on that journey.

Players begin their mansion journey with a woodland explorer map, which can be obtained by trading with a journeyman cartographer for around 14 emeralds and a compass  In Java Edition. If you are playing on hard mode, you can convert villagers to zombie villagers and convert back using a golden apple and splash potion of weakness It makes the price discount. This is totally optinal, the cartographer always sells the map, but in Bedrock Edition, they have a 13 chance to sell it. Besides a maps regular features, the explorer map has a house-shaped icon that indicates where the mansion is.

Since the journey to the mansion is extremely long, chances are youll discover new places along the way, some of which contain extra loot. Do explore them before continuing on your journey as you might be able to stock up on supplies for your upcoming raid. Blacksmiths in villages and temples are among the more useful structures youll find. You can also find many other biomes and rare structures. If you find a ocean monument, keep the coordinates of it because ocean monuments require different equipment.

Before you enter the mansion, you should set up a small base at its cobblestone entrance, where it is pre-lit by torches. Build a fence around the entrance to prevent hostile mobs from trespassing. Bring a bed so you can sleep at night and set your spawn point here temporary unless you want to use the mansion as your base. Make a smoker to prepare extra food and position your ender chest beside your bed. Dont forget to bring along your shulker box if you have one, as you can store more items with it! Surround your camp with a roof to prevent hostile mobs from attacking you while you're sleeping.

Stay alert as you explore. Theres nothing more awful than getting surprised by a creeper explosion and dying on the spot, losing all your experience points in the process. Vindicator ambushes are another threat as they deal hefty amounts of damage, also having a chance to kill you if you're playing on hard difficulty.
For added security, you could head to the second floor immediately to kill an evoker and get its Totem of Undying, before exploring normally afterwards floor-by-floor.
If you spot groups of illagers in the distance, use a ranged weapon to take them out one-by-one. Against lone ones, however, dont hesitate to dispatch them with your sword or axe.
Don't bother looking in storage room chests; they contain nothing, and looking through them leaves you vulnerable to vindicator ambushes.
Always look out for solid walls where windows should be, or strange missing spaces in-between rooms; these could indicate a secret room behind. Two of them contain obsidian with a diamond block in the center, so be sure to take with you a diamond pickaxe to extract the diamonds within.
If you plan to make the mansion your base, be sure to light up every room to prevent hostile mob spawning. Be careful not to accidentally set anything on fire or let creepers sneak up on you, although having a clump of vindicators near you while the creeper is about to blow up could be an advantage.

Before exploring a woodland mansion, knowing its structures is quite important.
Although their exact structure varies, all woodland mansions have some things in common: they all have three floors with a variety of rooms, and generate a cobblestone foundation underneath the entire structure if there are any gaps between the bottom of the mansion and the ground. The top floor is about half the size of the lower floors, but the size of each top floor is pretty random for each mansion, depending on how many rooms are going to be generated on the top floor. Each mansion includes a large foyer that leads to the corridors connecting the rooms, a giant staircase also generates there, which leads up to the second floor. The foyer is dark and many hostile mobs spawn under the staircase.  

A woodland mansion contains many types of rooms. Because the layout is randomly generated, some room types may not be present. Furthermore, certain rooms within the mansion are not readily accessible  some may have sealed entrances, while secret rooms have no entrances at all.
One may access the individual structures of a woodland mansion by using structure blocks to manually load room structures from the /data/minecraft/structures/woodland_mansion folder in minecraft.jar. To do so, set a structure block to Load mode, enter woodland_mansion/structure_name, and press LOAD. A list of possible rooms, the names of these structures, and small descriptions are provided in the table below. Note that the room names are conjectural.

A woodland mansion can sometimes generate secret rooms on each floor. A secret room can be one of the following type: "X" room, spider room, fake end portal room, obsidian room, birch pillar room, clean chest room, lava room, and attic room, with the 'X" room being the most common, and the "lava" room being the rarest. A way to look for a secret room is looking for gaps between normal rooms, this way is the best on the first floor, as there are no windows. Another way is looking through the windows through the second and third floors of the mansion, since some secret rooms are exposed to windows. A last way to look for a secret room is cutting down the roof, which works best for the third floor alone. Then you can see any secret rooms from the roof of the floor, as the whole floor's layout. 
In the table below, a structure block indicates either a chest with random loot, or the spawn point of an illager.

Vindicators have 24  12 HP, which means theyre not the beefiest mobs out there. However, their punishing axe blows deal a maximum of 19  9.5 damage on Hard difficulty, and are especially dangerous if their axes are enchanted.

Shields are redundant, so quickly attack them until they die.
Against a group, either strike before retreating, or build a 3-block tall pillar to hit your assailants from above.
They drop 0-2 emeralds upon death and have a chance of dropping their iron axe as well.
Try not to run into a group of vindicators because if each of them attack you it's easy to lose a lot of health.
If there are any hostile mobs such as zombies around you or the vindicator, quickly lure the zombies to the vindicator and name the vindicator "Johnny" with your name tags so you can attack the vindicator while it's attacking the zombies. That way you can easily dispatch the vindicator without its attention entirely on you. Skeletons aren't a good idea, unless you make them accidentally shoot the vindicator instead, which requires good skills.
Using a bow to kill them is a good idea, you can also locate a vindicator, stay away from it, and build a 3-block tall pillar so you can snipe the vindicator from the top of the pillar. If your bow is enchanted with Flame or Power, you can snipe it from far away so it can kill the vindicator in one hit. If you miss, it doesn't matter. The vindicator doesn't care if a arrow sails over its head, so you can snipe it again until it dies.
The best strategy is attacking and running backwards so you can knock the vindicator away while running backwards, but be careful, vindicators can ambush you from behind if you don't pay attention to your surroundings.

Evokers have 24  12 HP like vindicators, but have a more unconventional fighting style. When within a 16-block radius, they summon a row of evocation fangs that bypass armor and shields, and when cornered, they summon a ring of said fangs instead. Evokers may also summon three vexes to join the fight, and flee at the players sprinting speed when cornered.

Whenever possible, kill evokers upon sight as quickly as you can so that they won't have the chance to summon vexes or their fangs. This is especially important, since evokers cast their summoning spells upon being attacked inside most areas of a woodland mansion.
Shooting them with a ranged weapon is the safest way to defeat an evoker, but keep your distance if the evoker senses that you're close, it has a chance to summon evoker fangs or vexes, which can be a nasty trouble for you. Try to get a Power 1-5 bow or you can enchant your bow with flame so the evoker can die in 1 hit, but if you see the evoker preparing to summon fangs or vexes, kill it immediately.
Melee combat is also possible; corner the evoker into a small space while dodging any fangs that come your way, before striking repeatedly until it dies.
Upon death, evokers drop their Totem of Undying as well as 0-1 emeralds, which can be good for later survival and trading.
Evokers can walk as fast as the player's sprinting speed, so be sure to keep some food in your hotbar when you see one. If it flees, you can lose track of it if your hunger bar gets too low and cannot sprint.
Bring a blue sheep and a few blue dyes so the evoker can focus on turning the blue sheep red, giving you time to finish the evoker. The evoker also have a cooldown before it can summon anything else.

Summoned by evokers, vexes can fly through walls and floors to attack their target by surprise. Despite their low health pool, they deal up to 13  6.5 damage on Hard difficulty, meaning that theyre not to be trifled with.

Time your hits well against vexes, and retreat if necessary to avoid getting struck.
Use your shield to block any attacks since vexes are hard to hit with their small size and they retreat for a few seconds after attacking.
Against a swarm of vexes, just flee from the scene and ignore them; they drop nothing when killed anyway and despawn within 2 minutes.

Most people do this strategy when raiding the woodland mansion.
Bring all your things with you and don't forget your ender chest containing your shulker boxes. When you enter the mansion, start illuminating it. Kill any hostile mobs you see. When you are looting a room, kill all hostile mobs and light the room up. Take all the furniture and loot because they will be useful later. This will also remind you that you have raided this room. 
You can also mark the entrance if you don't want the furniture. Punch holes in the walls to check for secret rooms. If you find loot and your inventory gets full, open your ender chest and take out a shulker box to store your loot. Quickly put the shulker box in the ender chest so you don't risk losing it. Repeat for the other rooms. On the second floor and third floor, there are evokers, which summon vexes. Kill them first by sniping or cornering them. If your sword has Knockback, it is unrecommended to attack an evoker with it because you will knock it away and it can sprint as fast as the player. Once the evoker is dead, kill the vindicators and take the loot and furniture. 
Again, punch holes in the walls to check for secret rooms. Some rooms are more dangerous than others and the loot and furniture are different, such as the conference rooms, where five vindicators and one evoker generates within. If you take all the loot and furniture, you will gain a lot of useful resources. Aside from the woodland mansion chest loot, you will get a lot of mob drops, carpets, stairs and slabs from furniture, bookshelves, flowerpots, flowers, banners, cauldrons, chests, diamond and lapis blocks, cobblestone, redstone, iron doors, dirt, wheat, seeds, melons, pumpkins, and dark oak saplings. Even those things aren't much value, they are worth taking because they can save you some resources. There are also many alternative strategies to loot a woodland mansion, it is based on personal preference.

Required Items:

Fairly good fighting skills
Procedure:
Using a  sword or  bow, attack the illagers head on. Take down the mansion room by room, and punch holes in the walls to look for secret rooms.

Required Items:

 Water bucket
Procedure:
When a vindicator spots you, apply the water bucket right underneath you to make a water pool. Stand in the water and hit the vindicators with your sword, as they will have a very hard time getting to you, since they cannot go to you while the water is flowing towards them.

Required Items:

 Bow or  crossbow (preferably enchanted)
 Arrows (several stacks / use Infinity)
 Water bucket
 An axe
Procedure:
Climb to the top of the mansion where youll set up camp. From there, destroy the roof and whip out your ranged weapon of choice to shoot any illagers from above, room-by-room. After clearing a loot room containing illagers, use your water bucket to head downwards, extract the loot and head to the roof again for more shooting. This method is great in the sense that all secret rooms are guaranteed to be uncovered.

Required Items

 Potion of Invisibility
Procedure:

Enter the mansion invisible. Trap illagers you see in blocks, making sure that you dont come too close as they might notice you.

Required Items

Other players with regular supplies
Procedure:
There are many different ways to raid a mansion in a group. Its easiest to go full-on Melee Warfare with a team, though more organized players might assign roles for each teammate (e.g. melee fighter, sniper, potion lobber, etc.) before heading in.

Required Items

A pack of tamed wolves (the more the better)
Extra meat to heal the wolves, preferably a stack of cooked meat of any type.
Procedure:
Use regular stategies to go about raiding the mansion. Your wolves will serve as your guardians and increase your survivability. Make sure you heal them after defeating an illager or some illagers in a room. 

Required Items

 5+ name tags
 Invisibility potions
Procedure:
Name vindicators "Johnny" such that they attack other hostile mobs in the mansion, which will make your raid much more pleasant. Invisibility potions reduce the likelihood of the vindicators noticing you as you name them, but you can charge up to them from behind and name them, then run.

Equipment

  Some TNT
 Flint and steel
Procedure:
Its simple as blowing up parts of the mansion to destroy illagers, or burning everything away to reveal hidden chests. Just stay away from fires and explosion, of course! Don't do this if you want to keep the mansion as your base.

Spider room - There is a spider spawner in the center of the room. Kill all spiders in the room and light up the spawner. Take all the cobwebs with shears because they are strictly limited in a Minecraft world.
Obsidian room - There is a diamond block in the middle of a obsidian pile. Mine the obsidian with a diamond or better pickaxe and take the diamond block.
Jails - There are many vindicators in the jails. Kill all of them and break the iron doors. Take the cauldron and brown carpets because cauldrons are expensive to make. Free the allays if possible as well.
Bedrooms - There are many vindicators, except in the master bedroom. Kill all of them and take the wool and carpet from the beds. The loft on one of the master bedrooms has a chest next to the bed.
Fake End Portal room - There is a trapped chest next to two tnt. Destroy the tnt and take the trapped chest and the ender pearls. Destroy the wool end portal because you cannot use it as a real one. The stone blocks are infested, so be careful. If you want to remove them, break one and kill all silverfish, or use silk touch to mine them.
Illager statue room - There is a large illager wool statue holding a torch in one of its hand with a lapis lazuli block inside its head. Light the room up with light source blocks and seal the entrance, one block above the ground with a horizontal row of blocks. Destroy the statue and collect the wool and the lapis block.
Dining rooms - The small and medium don't have illagers. Take all the furniture. The large dining room has an evoker and 2 vindicators. Kill the evoker by sniping it to avoid vexes. Kill the vindicators using a sword or by shooting them.
Conference room - This is the most dangerous room, containing 5 vindicators and an evoker. Kill the evoker as fast as possible before killing the vindicators. You can pillar jump a few blocks (2 or 3 blocks) after defeating the evoker to avoid being hit by the vindicators. Take the furniture when you are done.
Map room - This room has 2 vindicators and an evoker. Fight them using the methods described in the conference room. Take the illagers' carpet map, table and bookshelves.
Arena room - This room has no illagers, but it is dangerous because you can be surprised by monsters from the top loft. Start by lighting the room with any light source blocks. Destroy the center arena and kill the mobs in there. Then, pillar up a few blocks to snipe at the monsters in the loft. Be careful of skeletons and have your shield ready. If you see a creeper, immediately retreat. Kill it using your bow. Build a bridge to the loft or climb the ladder. There is a loot chest.
Lava room - This room has lava surrounding a diamond block and the lava is in a glass cage surround partially by obsidian. Loot this room last because there is high risk of fire. Start by mining the top obsidian. Break one piece of glass on the top of the cage and quickly pour water to cover the lava. Extinguish any fires you set. Break all the glass and convert the first layer of lava to obsidian. Lower the water source and mine the obsidian. The next layer would have turned to obsidian. Repeat for the other layers. Take the diamond block when you are done removing the lava and extinguish all fires.

Many mansion rooms contain chests with dungeon loot in them, along with a extra disc.

"Checkerboard room" - the loot chest is located above the entrance.
"X room" - theres a loot chest at the corner.
"Gray banner room" - the loot chest is found behind the cobblestone construction.
"Wood arch hallway" - the loot chest is located the end of the room.
"Winding stairway room" - the loot chest is located at the end of the winding passageway.
Bedroom with loft - the loot chest is found at the loft, which can reached by climbing a ladder.
Lone chest room - the loot chest sits in plain sight at the center.
"Attic room" - there are two loot chests positioned at each end of the upper attic of this room.
"Arena room" - the loot chest resides on the loft.
"Fake End portal room" - the trapped chest, which contains 2 Ender pearls, sits on the woolen End portal, and is flanked by two TNT on each side.
Allium room - the chest at the entrance is full of alliums.
"Sapling farm" - the chest at the entrance holds 28 dark oak saplings.
"Tree-chopping room" - the loot chest at the foot of the tree contains an iron axe enchanted with Efficiency I.
Storage rooms, mushroom farm - the chests next to the table and chair are empty.
Aside from loot chests, there are several valuable blocks that the player can scavenge from the mansion's rooms: the secret obsidian room" and "lava room" both contain a diamond block in the center of the structures, and the "illager statue room" contains a hidden lapis lazuli block in the illagers head, to name a few.
For further information, please see the page woodland mansion/loot.

After the mansion is looted, there are a number of things you can do with it. You can turn it into a home, burn it down, systematically dismantle it to get extra resources, or just leave it as it is. Like Outposts, You can just leave. Hostile Mobs can eventually respawn if there isn't any light.

The woodland mansion is a nice looking structure. Turn the mansion into your base. Light it up and clear out all hostile mobs. Fix all creeper holes and fire damage. You can use the original rooms, or tear down the inner walls and build them how you want. You can take all the furniture to add your own. Make sure to change the wool beds in the bedrooms into real beds so you can sleep in them. Placing two beds next to each other makes a wide and good-looking bed. Add a kitchen, bathroom, better bedrooms, anything you want. You can even redesign the whole mansion, but it will take a long time to do so. Be careful if you want to redesign the sides of the roof to make it look nicer, as you can fall from up to twenty blocks and possibly die. Putting farms on top of the mansion's roof can be effective for food since sunlight helps crops grow faster. Don't worry about Illagers as long as you've explored all the rooms and killed all of them since they never respawn, unlike pillagers.

Since the mansion is in a dark forest, you can make a giant basement and carve windows into a cobblestone foundation that is taller than one mansion level (roughly around ten blocks, but you can make it as tall as you want). The first floor doesn't have windows since the trees around obstruct it, but you can carve windows into it. The dark oak wood from the trees around it blends nicely with the rest of the mansion. You can also chop down trees around and use the logs to expand the mansion to that area too.

Making houses with the dark oak wood from the nearby trees around the mansion can turn the area into a nice looking village. Be sure to make a villager breeder consisting of at least 2 villagers (you can bring villagers from another village or cure any zombie villagers you find) to populate the mansion. Make job sites for the villagers and put beds in the upper rooms of the mansion. After you get lots of villagers and claimed beds, iron golems can spawn and protect you and the villagers from hostile mobs such as zombies and skeletons. 

You can build some type of farm(s) inside. You can make a spider farm with the spider spawner, bring in villagers for villager trading halls, or make the building a giant crop farm, which works best on the roof, as crops uproot if not connected with sunlight. An animal farm works too, but you need some food to breed them.

Simple as that, set an entire mansion room on fire using flint and steel or fire charges and run out of the mansion. Stay at least 10 blocks from any nearby fires since the fire can burn through the trees.

Use the woodland mansion for a community building. Redo the inner walls and move it to the location you want using mods. Some ideas are making a hotel, town hall, or factory.