Clay farming is a 1.19 feature that makes clay much simpler to farm, as well as blocks like mud. It requires you to soak a dirt block with a water bottle to turn it into mud, and then place it over a dripstone block which has a dripstone below it, which will "dry out" the mud block and turn it into clay.

This method is how to farm it from scratch if you haven't found a swamp yet and don't have any mud. If you do have a lot of mud, you can replace the dirt with the mud and you don't need to worry about soaking it. Here is what you will need and how to do it:

Some dirt
A water bucket and some glass bottles
A decent amount of dripstone and the same amount of dripstone blocks
First, you will need to build up 4 blocks and start placing some dripstone blocks in that height. You can do it in any style you prefer, such as strips or squares. Then, place stalactite dripstones under the blocks, and place dirt above it. Then, place the water in a spot where you can access it when above the dirt blocks, and fill up all the glass bottles and soak all of the dirt with the bottles, until it turns into mud. When the chunk is loaded the mud will slowly dry out and eventually turn into clay, and then you can harvest it and repeat the process of placing and wetting the dirt.

To semi-automate the design, you will have needed to build it in strips. First place dispensers facing into the dirt blocks and place water bottles in each of them, and link them up to a button using redstone. You can also place observers facing into the other side of the dirt blocks and connecting them to a bell or note blocks to make a sound and to a redstone lamp to make a light so that you know when the clay is ready to harvest. To activate the farm, press the button and it will soak the dirt blocks, which will also activate the observers, but when the observers are activated again, the clay is fresh to harvest.

A way to place and soak the dirt blocks
A system that will push the mud blocks into an area which will dry them out
A way to harvest the clay blocks once they are dried out
A collection system
A regeneration beacon that will stop you from dying if you run out of hunger after AFKing for a long time