Getting max gear is incredibly important especially when you're on a war-type server. Here are the methods that can be used to get max gear.

Villages are one of the most important structures in the game as they contain villagers. Villagers can trade many items, ranging from enchanted books to Ender Pearls and even diamond gear. 
When we spawn in the world, we can go to a random direction and just wait until we find a village. If you're on a semi-anarchy server though, it's better if you set your camp more than 2,000 blocks away from spawn to prevent other players from griefing your base and steal some valuables. While we go to our village, there are some things that we need, sugarcane, leather, wool and food. Pick up sugarcane when you find them and kill cows, donkeys, mules, horses and llamas on sight. Another method is take the world seed, scout out the world and once we pick a suitable location, go there and while on our journey, loot structures that you might come across while also getting wool, leather, food and sugarcane. Also if you come across either a Taiga, Dark Oak or Jungle biome, take 4 of those saplings as the 2x2 trees give the most wood out of any tree in the game.
Once we got to our village, we need to herd villagers in one area. To do this, break all the beds and put them in your desired area. The villagers will go to the beds when it's night time. After that's done, we need to farm carrots/potatoes, sugarcane and breed villagers (can be done by placing more beds and giving each villager at least 3 bread loaves or 12 vegetables). We can turn some of them into librarians or fletchers. 
If you still don't have diamond gear at this point, we can either mine for them or trade with the villagers. For the villager method, trade with the weaponsmiths, toolsmiths and armourers until you max them out and buy the diamond equipment they sell. For the mining method, we need a villager that sells Fortune II or III (we can just combine the level 2 to get level 3) and once we got the book, put it on an anvil and apply it on a pickaxe and we can mine for those either by strip mining or caving. While caving, also mine Redstone, Gold, Lapis Lazuli and Iron ores. 
If you now have the diamond gear, we needed this librarians with the following enchantments, Protection IV, Unbreaking III, Mending, Feather Falling IV, Sharpness V, Looting III, Fire Aspect II, Efficiency V and Silk Touch. For our armour, we needed Protection, Unbreaking and Mending on them (Feather Falling IV on the boots to reduce fall damage), Sharpness, Looting, Unbreaking, Mending and Fire Aspect for the sword, Efficiency, Unbreaking, Mending and either Silk Touch or Fortune for your shovels, pickaxes and hoes and Efficiency, Sharpness, Unbreaking and Mending for your axe. Aside librarians, we also needed some clerics for either Ender Pearls or Bottles o' Enchanting. 
Once we have the gear, we're gonna go to the nether and we're there for 3 things, Nether Wart, Blaze Rods and Ancient Debris. For the first two, they can be found on one structure (the nether wart can also be found on Bastion Remnants "Housing Units type"). The nether wart and blaze rods are gonna be used for potion brewing. When we're going back to the portal, it's also the perfect time to get Ancient Debris. There are 2 ways to get the debris without using TNT, by simply strip-mining at y= 15 along a chunk border or by using beds while being on the same level.
Once we return to our camp, we can finally start brewing potions which will greatly help in a fight. The most important potions in PVP are Strength II, Swiftness II and Fire Resistance (8:00 minutes). However, we are still missing one thing and that is the Totem of Undying and to get those, we can either raid a Woodland Mansion or start a Raid. Starting a Raid is much easier than raiding a mansion due to the fact that mansions are the rarest structure in the game. Once we start a raid, we can get the totems by killing an Evoker. The number of totems we can obtain depends on the difficulty, you cannot get totems on Easy, you can only get 1 on Normal and at least 4 totems on Hard mode. When we acquire the totems we are officially PVP ready.

Unlike the aforementioned method, this one doesn't use a village, but instead uses a Gold XP Farm to get good enchants. To get the Mending books, we'll need to cure an Infected Villager first to make the prices lower while to get Soul Speed III, we'll need to either raid Bastions or barter with Piglins. This method isn't really efficient in large servers as other players will fill up the mob cap instead, rendering the farm useless.
When we spawn in the world, we can go right into caving. And then we need 3 things, leather, sugarcane and food. The fastest way to get leather and sugarcane is just kill the naturally-generating cows, donkeys, horses, mules and llamas while picking up sugarcane near rivers. We'll need around 90 leather while we'll need approximately 7 stacks of sugarcane so it'll require some farming.
At night, we can hunt some mobs, specifically Creepers and Endermen. We'll need 1 pearl and 10 gunpowder to craft 2 TNT (you can craft extra in case you made a mistake later on). We'll also need to go in the caves to acquire some materials, including building blocks, Lapis Lazuli to enchant, some diamonds and most importantly 2-3 stacks of Iron. To be as efficient as possible, you'd want to do this:

Mine for around 20 minutes.
Return to the sugarcane, break the grown ones and replant them.
When we have the materials, we can craft a Diamond Pickaxe and an Enchanting Table (save up the others for later use), enchant the pickaxe with Unbreaking I and smelt the iron for something else (don't craft it for gear). We then need to get obsidian to make a portal and chop around 4 stacks of wood for our build. After getting the rest of the materials, break the sugarcane and go to the nether. Once at the nether, break the portal, go to the Nether Wastes biome and erect a temporary camp for we'd need around 29 stacks of Magma Blocks and this is why we'd need an Unbreaking I pickaxe. The easiest way to get those magma blocks is at the nether sea level and they're found in huge clumps.
Once we have the required materials, go to the nether roof, teleport there using an ender pearl (make sure you have a Flint and Steel, 10 pieces of obsidian, the pistons, TNT, a trapdoor and a lever). Once above the nether roof, break the piece of bedrock you teleported from using a glitched exploit (Link:  NOTE: Custom server software such as Paper, Spigot and Purpur patches bedrock breaking exploits so check if your server has a custom software installed, to know, press F3 and it'll show you on the top left if you're either on "Integrated Server" or other custom server).
Once there, we can finally start on the construction of the Gold Farm (Link:  This XP farm however only uses 1 layer as opposed to the usual 2 or 3 layers. To start the farm, hurt one of the Zombified Piglins so that the others will try to kill you. Go back to the centre and the 24 minecarts will kill the piglins for XP (in vanilla Minecraft, the default number of entity cramming is 24 and custom software can alter this mechanics). First thing to do with the XP is to enchant a Fortune III pickaxe and if the Diamond pickaxe from earlier is almost broken, just enchant an Iron one but if you pick up extra diamonds earlier, craft a new pickaxe and enchant it with Fortune.
Once we have Fortune, we'd need to return to the Overworld, find a cave and acquire the remaining diamonds. We'd also need some more Lapis and more Iron for anvils and for hoppers to collect drops from the farm. Once we have the equipment, we then need to enchant it and it's pretty simple. For the armour, get at least Protection IV and Unbreaking III (boots must also have Feather Falling IV as a bonus to reduce fall damage). For the tools, get at least 2-3 essential enchantments such as Sharpness, Efficiency and Unbreaking. The rest of the enchantments are applied with books.
Once all are enchanted, we still needed some things, most importantly, we needed Blaze Rods, Nether Wart, Ancient Debris, Soul Speed 3 and Mending. First, go to the fortress, kill the Blazes and get the nether wart (not all nether fortresses have nether wart gardens though, there are some alternatives, loot the fortress chests or loot a Bastion Housing Unit type). While going back to our hole, it's the perfect time to look for Ancient Debris, go to y= 15 along a chunk border and strip-mine there but you can also use beds if you have some wool.
Once we get back to our hole in the nether, wait for some piglins to spawn and try to barter with them for Soul Speed III, this might take some time depending on your RNG so be patient.
Once we've acquired our Soul Speed III, get a brown mushroom, go back to our portal and go to the Overworld. Plant sugarcane until we have enough paper to trade with our future villager. The brew a Splash Potion of Weakness, craft a Golden Apple and it's now based on luck. Zombie Villagers have a 5% chance of spawning in substitute of a regular zombie. If you're on a server, tell the other online players to not sleep. Once we have the villager, cure him, craft a lectern and once cured, put it near him (put a bed near him if he doesn't accept his new job). Then reroll his trades until we have a Mending book, trade with him, craft some books to get the mending book and there. 
After that, smelt the debris and apply the mending books on our gear. And once our debris is smelted, craft the ingots and there we go, we're finally ready.

A mix of both methods is also a good strategy to get good gear, here is the way.
When we spawn in the world, we'd need to go to a village that's quite far away from spawn and while travelling, loot shipwrecks, buried treasures and any village we can ransack. Once at our destination, we'll then trade with the villagers for a Fortune 3 book, apply it on our pickaxe (preferably a diamond one) and mine for the diamonds. You can either strip-mine for them or find huge caves that go below y= 0 to get the full diamond gear. Strip-mining has huge ore veins and gives you a ton of building blocks (very important later on) while caving is more reliable, gives more ores but diamond ores only has veins of one and two and doesn't really give you as much building blocks.
Once we have the full gear, we can then start construction of the farm. In Java, make a new diamond pickaxe, enchant it with Unbreaking I and mine for the magma blocks we're gonna need and build the farm. Once finished, we can then gather the lapis and books we need and start enchanting our items. Then go to a fortress, get the nether wart and the blaze rod we need, collect the ancient debris, smelt them, brew some pots for PVP and convert our diamond gear into netherite, get a mending villager and get 9 mending books and apply them to our gear. Then start a raid and we're officially PVP ready. In Bedrock, however, since we can't build above the nether roof, we'll make this design instead by navynexus (Link:  If you don't have a trident yet, download an autoclicker and use your sword to attack the zombified piglins. You can then start enchanting your gear, get mending, apply them on our gear, go to the nether, find a fortress, get the blaze rods and nether wart, go back to the overworld, brew pots, start mining for the ancient debris, smelt it, convert our gear to netherite grade, start a raid, collect a totem and we're now ready to fight.