This guide is intended to show players how to obtain all of the achievements in Minecraft. For a more detailed list of each achievement, see the achievement page. For a tutorial on the Java Edition's set of advancements, see the page Tutorials/Advancement guide.

There are 122 achievements in Bedrock and Nintendo Switch editions, 93 achievements in Xbox 360 and Wii U editions, 122 achievements in Xbox One Edition, 123 trophies in PlayStation 4 Edition, 94 trophies in PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita editions, and 59 achievements in New Nintendo 3DS Edition. In total, there are 491 achievements/trophies.

All 122 achievements in the Bedrock Edition can be achieved with the following Achievement world. This also includes the exclusive PlayStation 4 Edition trophies, but not the battle mode trophies.

The Nintendo Switch Edition, Xbox 360 Edition, Wii U Edition, Xbox One Edition, PlayStation 4 Edition, PlayStation 3 Edition, PlayStation Vita Edition (all Legacy Console Editions), and the New Nintendo 3DS Edition, are all discontinued.

Goal: Open your inventory.
This achievement is the first of Bedrock Edition, including the easiest.

For keyboard: Press E
For controller:
Press  on the Xbox 360 & Xbox One & Xbox Series X|S
Press  on the PlayStation 3 & PlayStation 4 & PlayStation 5
Press  on the Wii U & Nintendo Switch
For touch: Tap  (on Hotbar)
A large screen will pop up. This is the inventory and crafting menu.

Goal: Pick up a wood block.
This achievement requires you to hold down the hit/mine button while facing a block of wood until it breaks, then walking over it to pick it up.
Wood blocks are found on trees, which are very easy to find in most biomes, excluding the ocean, desert or badlands biomes.
Logs can also be found in swamp huts, villages, pillager outposts, and woodland mansions.

Goal: Construct a crafting table.
Obtain a block of wood and open your inventory. In the four-block crafting space, place the log and pick up the planks from the output slot. Distribute these four planks evenly in the crafting space to make a 22 square and pick up the resulting crafting table.
Alternatively, use the recipe book and just click the crafting table to craft it.

Goal: Construct a wooden hoe.
Place the crafting table you just made on the ground, and right-click with your mouse on it, to use it. If you changed the use item/place block key to something else, use that instead.
Then make some sticks, note that this can also be done in your inventory crafting grid:

Now arrange your sticks and some planks in the crafting table to make a hoe:

Goal: Make bread.
Break several blocks of tall grass until you gain three seeds. You can do this with one seed but it will take longer.
Then right-click with your hoe on three dirt, podzol, or grass blocks to create farmland, preferably near water, so the seeds get hydrated, and grow faster.
Next, hold the seeds, and right-click on all the farmland blocks. Wait for 1-3 in-game days for the seeds to grow into wheat. Alternately, using bone meal on the seeds will cause it to grow into wheat faster.
After that, break the wheat.
Arrange the wheat like so to craft bread:

Goal: Make cake.
This achievement is a reference to the video game Portal which spawned the meme phrase "The Cake Is A Lie".
Collect the following:

1 egg (can be obtained from chicken)
3 milk buckets (milk a cow using a bucket by right-clicking)
2 sugar (from sugar cane)
3 wheat
If you don't have a bucket, you can also craft it using iron ingots.

Arrange the ingredients like so to craft cake:

Goal: Construct a wooden sword.
Make sure that you have one stick and two wooden planks in your inventory. Better materials for the blade work for this achievement too.
Arrange the ingredients like so to craft a wooden sword:

Goal: Pick up leather.
Find a cow, mooshroom, horse, donkey, or llama. Cows can appear at any place with grass and enough light, unless it is an ocean biome. Horses and Donkeys can only spawn in a plains and savanna biome. Red mooshroom only spawn in mushroom fields biome. Llamas only spawn in mountains and savanna biomes. You may have to wander a bit to find one, so make sure you'll be able to find your way back.
Then when you find one, stand next to it and left-click to hit it. You will need to hit it a lot to kill it. They can drop one or two leather (cows along with raw beef). If you did not get any, try the same with another cow, mooshroom, horse, donkey, or llama.
Another way to obtain the achievement is to find and kill some rabbits until you have 4 rabbit hides. Then craft leather and throw it on the ground. When you pick it up, you'll get the achievement.
Another way is by fishing leather if you have luck.

Goal: Breed two cows with each-other.
Use wheat on 2 cows or 2 mooshrooms to make them breed.

Goal: Take any amount of fall damage when riding on a pig.
Get a saddle and a carrot on a stick.
Use the saddle on a pig, which should be near a cliff. The easiest way to get it to jump off a cliff is to hold a carrot on a stick in your hand and walk, like you normally would, in the direction of the cliff until you and the pig fall.
Alternatively, you can put the pig on a piston, trapdoor, fence gate, or any kind of opening mechanism. Then ride the pig up there and open the mechanism so you and the pig will take fall damage.

Goal: Kill a hostile mob (monster).
Find a hostile mob. In the Overworld, they can only spawn in darkness, so you should wait until night, or find a dark area like a cave. In the Nether, most can spawn in bright areas. In the End, endermen can only spawn in darkness. You can also find a spawner in a dungeon, mineshaft, stronghold, nether fortress, or woodland mansion and wait for a monster to spawn. Silverfish can be hidden in stone blocks in mountains biomes, and will spawn when the stone is broken.
Then hit it until it dies. With a sword or some tools, this goes faster.

Goal: Kill a skeleton by shooting it from a distance of at least 50 blocks.
Find a large flat area on the surface. Dig a trench one and a half blocks deep, two blocks wide and several blocks long. Line the trench with light. Just over 50 meters away from the lip of the trench, make a tower 15 blocks high. When night comes, wait for a skeleton to fall into the trench or lure it in. Then from your tower, aim just above the skeleton, about halfway between it and the horizon, and fire from full charge until it dies. With a Flame enchantment, you can see where your arrows landed better and can adjust your aim easier, but the skeleton might die of the fire, not giving the achievement.

Goal: Construct a Wooden Pickaxe.
Make sure that you have 3 planks and 2 sticks in your inventory.
Arrange the ingredients like so or click the wooden pickaxe button in the recipe book to craft a wooden pickaxe:

Goal: Construct a cobblestone, or better, pickaxe from sticks and cobblestone, or other better ingredients.
Use your new wooden pickaxe to mine some stone, which in return you will receive cobblestone. Make sure that you have 2 sticks in your inventory.

Goal: Eat an Enchanted Apple.
These can not be crafted as of 1.9. You must now find them in desert temple, dungeon, mineshaft, bastion remnant, ruined portal, or woodland mansion.

Goal: Construct a furnace.
Mine 8 blocks of cobblestone and open your crafting table. Arrange the cobblestone like so to craft a furnace:

Goal: Obtain the item that gets created after cooking fish.
The easiest way to catch a fish is to swim underwater and using a sword, attacking the salmon/cod.
Alternatively, you can craft and use a fishing rod. Cast your rod into a water body, then right-click so the "bait" lands into the water, and wait till it comes closer to the rod and right-click again when you hear a splash sound. The fish will fly towards you and probably will be picked up by you too. 
At last, put the cod or salmon you got in the furnace with fuel like so:

Goal: Pick up an iron ingot.
Mine iron ore with a stone pickaxe, and put it in the furnace like so:

Alternatively you can find them in various loot chests, and are also a rare drop from zombies.

Goal: Travel 500 blocks with a minecart from where you started.
It will take at least 192 iron ingots as well as 32 sticks to craft enough rails (512 or 8 stacks). Alternatively, you can find and break them in mineshafts or woodland mansions. Then, build a continuous track so that a minecart can travel the full distance. Afterwards, place a minecart on the start of the track, then travel from the start to the end without leaving the minecart.
The achievement does not allow you to repeatedly loop the same section of the track.
You will most likely need powered rails to get this achievement. These will take additional resources. You can also make a gradual decline from a great height to use gravity instead of powered rails.

Goal: Pick up a diamond.
Look in various loot chests or search below layer 16 for diamond ore (layer 5-12 is also good, layer 12 is the best; press F3 to see your coordinates) and destroy it using your iron pickaxe. Creeper or TNT explosions have a chance of dropping the diamond as well. Mineshafts are extremely useful for this achievement.
Arrange the ingredients like so to craft an iron pickaxe:

Goal: Throw a diamond at another player or mob that can pick it up.
Drop/throw a diamond using Q or the key that you use, at another player or mob that can pick it up, such as a zombie.
Note: Mobs won't pick up items on Easy difficulty, or if the gamerule mobGriefing is sets to false. Foxes do not work.

Goal: Craft an Enchantment Table
Make a diamond pickaxe so you can mine at least 4 obsidian (or find it in various loot chests):

Then get 3 paper and 1 leather, the paper being made from sugar canes like so:

Then craft a book like so:

Arrange the ingredients like so to craft an enchantment table:

Goal: Construct a bookshelf.
Make sure you have 6 planks and 3 books in your inventory,
Arrange the ingredients like so to craft a bookshelf:

To achieve the maximum potential from the enchantment table, place 15 bookshelves 1 block away from the enchantment table (in a box shape), like this:

Although not required, this is the most efficient method to acquire the highest enchantment possible. Any additional bookshelves around the enchantment table beyond 15 will not increase the maximum level beyond 30 and will only serve aesthetic purposes.

Goal: Deal 9 hearts of damage in one hit.
Enchant a sword with Bane of Arthropods, Smite, or Sharpness with a level high enough to deal together with the sword's base damage at least 18  9 in one hit to a mob/player. Alternatively, enchant trident with Impaling. Dealing critical hits greatly helps for this achievement. Potions of strength will count as increased damage so strength will make this achievement easier. The netherite sword is the easiest.

Goal: Create a Nether Portal
Collect at least 10 obsidian with a diamond or netherite pickaxe and build a nether portal. If you cannot get obsidian in item form, create a mold and pour water next to lava source blocks (more details can be found in Tutorials/Nether survival). Light the nether portal with flint and steel.
Place your obsidian blocks like so, upright. The cobblestone can be replaced with obsidian, or any other block (including air).

You can make nether portals up to 2323, but it is not recommended as it requires a lot of obsidian.

Goal: Kill a ghast with a fireball.
Aim at the ghast then punch the fireball when it is close enough to you to deflect it. If you can perfectly aim, a shot arrow or fishing rod bobber may hit the fireball and deflect it, or you can hit it back with a sword. When you are hitting it you have to time it right, and to hit it back with a sword you use the use button with a sword in your hand.

Goal: Pick up a blaze rod.
Kill a blaze and collect its dropped blaze rod. An easy way to do this is to find a nether fortress, then find a blaze spawner. Armed with over 7 snowballs, attack the blaze from range. Blazes dont always drop their rods so you might have to try a few times. A potion of Fire Resistance is useful. Upon the blaze's death, collect the rod.

Goal: Pick up a Potion from one of the 3 lower Brewing Stand's slots.
Get a water bottle, Place it in one of the 3 lower brewing stand's slots, then put blaze powder in the fuel slot. Then put a potion ingredient in it, and wait until it is done brewing. If you don't have glass bottle, you can craft it using glass. To create glass, smelt sand:

Next, craft an glass bottle:

Then fill the glass bottle with water, to turn it into a water bottle.
Arrange the ingredients like so to craft a brewing stand:

Goal: Enter an end portal.
Throw ender eyes and follow them to locate a stronghold.
Then find the stronghold's portal room.
After that activate the portal by using an eye of ender in every empty end portal edge block slot, then jump into the portal.
Arrange the ingredients like so to craft an eye of ender:

Goal: Set foot in 17 biomes.
Travel and step into 17 biomes in the game.
Note: This achievement is almost unobtainable in old worlds.

Goal: Enter the Exit Portal after killing the ender dragon.
Here is how to slay it:

Destroy the end crystals using projectiles (like snowballs, eggs, bow or crossbow with arrows, etc.)
After they are destroyed, hit the ender dragon using projectiles (like bow with arrows, etc.). An enchanted bow would probably be the best option.
When you kill the ender dragon, you will gain 60-78 levels of experience and a return portal will generate. Get the experience, and (optionally) the dragon egg. Then, enjoy the credits. (You can press Esc to skip the credits.)

Goal: Spawn the wither.
Here are some tips for how to spawn it:

Soul sand or soul soil are not that difficult to acquire. It can be found in the Nether in soul sand valley biomes. Just watch out for ghasts and other hostile mobs that spawn in the Nether.Wither skulls on the other hand are difficult to obtain. Here are the best tips available.
To increase spawn rates, break down the walls to have more floor space.
Remove any blazes and their spawners, (unless you are skilled in making experience farms using them).
Wear diamond armor (or netherite) and bring a fire resistance potion (for blazes and accidental lava deaths).
It is also helpful to have a diamond sword (or netherite) with the Looting III enchantment.
Have lots of patience. You'll need it since wither skulls are a rare drop and you need 3.
Be careful of the wither skeleton's attacks. They give you the Wither effect, which is poisonous and extremely deadly. It may be a good idea to bring milk.
Snowballs are also a terrific way to defeat blazes.
Every 15 blocks or so, put a bar so the walkway is only two blocks high. Wither skeletons cannot walk under anything that is less than three blocks tall.
Once you have three wither skeleton skulls and four soul sand, build the wither as follows:

Goal: Kill the wither.
This is the easiest way to defeat the wither, however, some would say it takes the fun out of killing the wither. It's your game, so play it how you want to play. but this is the most efficient way:

Go to the Nether.
Dig up until you reach the top bedrock.
Look for a 33 area of bedrock with the center block so it has nothing behind it.
Exactly three blocks down, place a piston. Next to it place a lever.
Spawn the wither on the piston and pull the lever before it blows up. Run out of the blast radius.
Once the wither blows up, it will be stuck in the bedrock ceiling and can't do any more damage. At this point hit it with whatever you like. It's kind of inefficient to do it with fists, but you could do it with anything, be careful when it reach half health, wither will explode and spawn 3-4 wither skeletons around it, and can start using dash attack. A netherite sword with Smite enchantment is quickest.
Once the wither is dead, pick up the nether star.

Goal: Create a full beacon.
Craft a beacon:

This is the second most tedious achievement because you will need 164 blocks of gem/metal, or 1,476 gem/metal ingots (around 23 stacks).

Once you have all of your iron ingots, gold ingots, diamonds, emeralds or netherite ingots make 164 blocks of gem/metal. Then make a square layer of 81 blocks, then a layer of 49, then 25 and then 9. In the middle of the last layer of the pyramid, place a beacon. Make sure there are no opaque blocks above it, as an opaque block above it will deactivate the beacon. Feed it an iron ingot, gold ingot, diamond, emerald, or netherite ingot and choose your primary power and secondary power.

Goal: Construct one of each type of tool.
This achievement is fairly simple. Collect 4 logs and then turn them all into planks. Use 4 of the planks to craft 8 sticks. Lastly, use the remaining planks and sticks to craft a wooden pickaxe, axe, shovel, and hoe. You should have 3 planks left over.
Crafting wooden axe and shovel:

Note: You can also use other materials such as stone, gold, iron, or diamonds to get the achievement.

Goal: Craft a dispenser.
This achievement has several steps:

Mine a log. Craft this log into planks, and then into sticks. You will only need 3 out of the 4 sticks.
Kill some spiders. Spiders only spawn in light level of 0 (i.e. in unlit caves, at night, etc.). Make sure to collect 3 pieces of string from the spiders you kill.
Mine 7 pieces of stone to collect cobblestone. Then, mine some redstone ores (redstone ores generate only below y=16).
Use your collected sticks and string to craft a bow.
Lastly, use the bow, cobblestone, and redstone to craft a dispenser, like so:

Goal: Tame a total of five wolves.
Make sure you have at least 30 bones incase of defective dog taming and they are found in:

Forest, except flower forest
Taiga
Giant tree taiga
Snowy taiga

Goal: Eat a piece of porkchop.
You are going to need some raw porkchop to earn this achievement, so kill a pig or a hoglin until you get at least a porkchop. You also need a furnace (or a smoker or a campfire). Mine 8 cobblestone and craft a furnace (and you can use the furnace and 4 stripped logs for a smoker, or instead [insert materials to make a campfire here] to make a campfire) on your work bench. Use some fuel to power the furnace (or smoker, if you use a campfire just right click the campfire with the pork) and put the pork in the top spot.

After eating the cooked porkchop, the achievement is awarded to you!

Goal: Get All of the achievements completed.
Automatically obtained when all other trophies have been obtained (PlayStation only).

Goal: Play for 100 days.
Play for 100 Minecraft days, which is equal to 33 hours and 20 minutes in real time.

Goal: Acquire or spend 30 Emeralds by trading.
Find a village, if you see a farm and farmer villager, see what their trades are, you can sell wheat, potato, carrot, or beetroot depending on what the farmer offers. You may need an extra farm if you cannot find these crops already growing in the village. You can easily get a ton of emeralds using this method, up to 12 per day for each farmer villager. You can also trade with a butcher villager for 7 raw porkchops for an emerald.

Goal: Craft a Flower Pot
This achievement has several steps:

Mine a clay block.
Smelt 3 clay balls into brick in furnace.

Craft a flower pot

Goal: Place a sign
You need a stick and 6 planks then craft a sign, then finally place it.

Goal: Eat Rotten Flesh while Starving
You need to deplete your hunger bar to zero (empty), then eat rotten flesh. Hunger bar can also be depleted by sprinting while jumping at only 2 blocks high, eating pufferfish also can deplete hunger much faster but is potentially too risky. Rotten flesh can be found in chests in some generated structures, by killing zombies and their variants, or by fishing. If you have a tamed cat which you leave standing while you sleep, the cat can also bring you a gift of rotten flesh.

Goal: Shear a Sheep.
Press use while holding shears on sheep, you need to craft shears before it:

Goal: Collect all 16 wool color.
You can collect different dye and dyeing wool or dyeing sheep then shear it, another way is buying colored wool from shepherd villager or finding in woodland mansion.
The colors are white, brown, black, light gray, gray, pink, magenta, red, orange, yellow, lime, green, light blue, cyan, blue, and purple.
You could get white, brown, black, gray, light gray, and pink wool from natural sheep without dying the wool.
A lot of the dyes for this comes from flowers so if you see a flower you have not obtained, grabbing it is suggested. 
Jungles will have some of the required dyes.

Goal: Swim in lava while having the Fire Resistance effect.
First, you need to have the Fire Resistance effect, such as from potion of Fire Resistance.
To brew the potion, you need brewing stand fueled with blaze powder, a water bottle, nether wart, and magma cream. If you can't find magma cube, craft one from slime ball and blaze powder:

Then brew it:

Add magma cream to awkward potion:

Another way to gain Fire Resistance such as buy arrow of Fire Resistance from master-level fletcher villager then aim at the sky and shot it using bow, eating an enchanted golden apple or using totem of undying also give player Fire Resistance. After effect granted, jump into lava. Alternatively, use a totem of undying in lava.

Goal: Mine 1,728 Cobblestone and place it in a chest.
Mine 1728 cobblestone or 27 stacks of cobblestone and place it in a chest. Cobblestone can be obtained anywhere as terrain foundation is filled with stone. If you don't want to dig underground you can cut hills or mountains, or just create a cobblestone generator.

Goal: Smelt wood logs using charcoal to make charcoal.
First, you need a furnace. Place logs in input slot, then power furnace with fuel, after logs turn into charcoal, use that as fuel to make more charcoal.

Goal: Play a music disc in a Jukebox.
You need to craft and place down jukebox first, using 8 planks and a diamond to craft a jukebox:

Then you need a music disc. Cat and 13 can be found in dungeon and woodland mansion, while mellohi and wait can be found in buried treasure, other music discs can be obtained by a skeleton or a stray killing a creeper.

Goal: Create an Iron Golem.
You need 36 iron ingots and a pumpkin, a carved pumpkin, or a jack o'lantern. First, craft 4 blocks of iron:

Then place it like this

Goal: Wear a full set of Iron Armor.
You need 24 iron ingots to craft full set of iron armor:

Iron armor can also be obtained from village weaponsmith, village armorer, stronghold altar, and end city chest or bought from armorer villager, or dropped by vindicator or pillager spawn in raids.

Goal: Cure a Zombie Villager
Throw a splash potion of Weakness at a zombie villager and give it a golden apple (by facing the zombie villager and pressing the use key with a golden apple in your hand).
Splash potion of Weakness can be brewed in brewing stand using water bottle by adding fermented spider eye.

then add gunpowder

Golden apples can be crafted using 8 gold ingots and an apple.

Golden apples can also be found in dungeon, woodland mansion, mineshaft, ocean ruins, desert pyramid, igloo and stronghold chests.
You can also find a zombie villager in an igloo basement, with a splash potion of Weakness already in brewing stand and a golden apple in the chest. The zombie villager is in an iron bars cell so curing it will take less time.

Goal: Gain the Trust of an Ocelot.
Feed an ocelot with a raw cod or raw salmon. Ocelots can only spawn in a jungle biome and variants. Once gained trust, ocelots no longer flee from you and you get this achievement.

Goal: Kill a Creeper with Arrows.
This achievement is easy to obtain once you have a bow and several arrows. Just shoot creeper at distance using a bow until it dies.

Goal: Dye all 4 types of Leather Armor.
You need a full set of leather armor, consisting of leather cap, leather tunic, leather pants, and leather boots. Then it requires a cauldron, water, and dyes.
To craft a cauldron, you need 7 iron ingots:

You can fill cauldron using water bucket, rain, or glass bottle. For dye, you can obtain it from flowers, cactus, lapis lazuli, cocoa bean, bone meal, ink sac, or by combining multiple dyes. Then dye water by adding it to the cauldron. Lastly, press use at cauldron filled with dyed water while holding leather armor.

Goal: Bounce 30 Blocks Upward off a Slime Block.
First, craft a slime block using 9 slimeballs, which can be obtained by killing slimes or from trading with wandering trader or from sneezing panda.

A simple way to achieve this achievement is to place 9 slime blocks in 33 block wide (55 are recommended), then use several stack of block such as dirt, cobblestone, planks, etc. to make tall pillar by jump-placing block till reach height limit than drop yourself to fall into slime block. If you built at the top of mountains biomes, you will reach height limit faster, but bounce height also decrease.

Goal: Kill a Mob While Wearing the same Type of Mob Head.
This achievement requires a mob head to obtain. Wither skeleton skull is the easiest to obtain as it doesn't require charged creeper to kill it. Wear the skull and kill another wither skeleton, and you will get this achievement.

Goal: Place 9 Fully Explored, Adjacent Maps Into 9 Item Frames In a 33 Square.
First, you need to place 9 item frames in 33 square. Item frame can be crafted using 8 sticks and a leather:

Then for maps, the map actually doesn't need a pointer, so compass are not required, and the cheapest way to create empty map without wasting so many paper is using cartography table which can be crafted using 2 papers and 4 planks:

Then use the cartography table to create an empty map. Just place paper on one of the input slots and you will get an empty map in the output slot. So you only need 11 paper (2 to craft a cartography table, and 9 for 9 empty maps). After you create 9 empty maps, you can create a map by pressing use, and since scale level is 0 it is easy to explore. Once all 9 maps completely explored, place it in each empty map you arranged in 33 block.

Goal: Use a Hopper to Transport an Item From a Chest Minecart to a Chest.
You need to craft a chest, a hopper, and a minecart with chest.
First, crafting 3 chests:

Chest can also be found in most generated structures.
Then, crafting a hopper:

Next, crafting a minecart with chest:

Minecart with chest can also be found in mineshaft.
And also crafting rail:

Rails can also be found inside minecarts with chest in mineshaft, only 1 required.
Finally, place a chest, connect a hopper to the chest, place a rail on top of hopper, place a minecart with chest on a rail, and put the item in the minecart with chest.

Goal: Connect Three Chests To A Single Furnace Using Three Hoppers.
Create an automatic smelter using a single furnace, 3 hoppers, and 3 chest like this:

Goal: Poison a Witch with a Splash Potion.
Throw a splash potion of Poison at a witch (by facing the witch and pressing the use key). First, brew a splash potion of Poison:

Then add gunpowder:

Goal: Push a Piston with a piston, then pull the original piston with that piston.
This require a piston, a sticky piston, some redstone dust, and a lever.

For sticky piston, craft like this:

Now, craft a lever:

Connect redstone to lever, piston, and sticky piston, then active it.

Goal: Tame a Horse.
You can tame adult horses using an empty hand to mount the horse repeatedly; when it no longer bucks the player and shows hearts, it is tamed.

Goal: Breed a mule from a horse and a donkey.
You can breed horse and donkey using golden apple or golden carrot, but golden carrots are recommended, since its cheaper (as it only requires gold nuggets instead of gold ingots).

You can also buy 3 golden carrots from a master-level farmer for 3 emeralds.

Goal: Win a public Battle mini game.

Goal: Win 3 public Battle games in a row.

Goal: Take 100 damage in a round of a public Battle mini game.

Goal: Kill 2 players in a round of a public Battle mini game using a bow and arrow.

Goal: Kill a player while you are starving in a Battle mini game.

Goal: Open every chest in a Battle mini game arena in one round

Goal: Stay underwater for 2 minutes.
Drink a potion of Water Breathing, then jump into water. Or use whirlpool bubble columns from a magma blocks to breath underwater for 2 minutes. Magma blocks can be usually found in underwater trenches, underwater cavern at lava layer, and at underwater ruins.
To brew potions of Water Breathing, you need a pufferfish, find the potion in buried treasure, or killing a witch while it is drinking the potion. You can get pufferfish by fishing outside jungle biomes or killing the pufferfish which can only spawn in warm ocean.

Then add redstone to extend the duration:

Goal: Cook and eat rabbit meat.
You are going to need some raw rabbit to earn this achievement, so kill rabbits until you get at least one raw rabbit. Then cook it in a furnace, smoker, or campfire. When cooking with a campfire, you do not require fuel, so after a short time the food will cook itself.

After eating the cooked rabbit, the achievement is awarded to you!

Goal: Defeat an Elder Guardian.
3 elder guardians always spawns in each monument, which generate only in deep ocean biome variants. Its better for you to wear a turtle shell with Respiration III and diamond (or netherite) boots with Depth Strider III. Having potion of Water Breathing can also help you stay underwater for longer time, or you can also use soul sand to create upward bubble columns, which can give you oxygen plus push entity upward. Its recommended to kill elder guardians using trident enchanted with Impaling V. Strength II may also help defeat elder guardian easier.
First, brew a potion of Strength:

Then, upgrade it using glowstone dust:

Goal: Dry a sponge in a furnace.
Smelt a wet sponge in a furnace. Wet sponges can be obtained in the sponge rooms of an ocean monument (note that not all have a sponge room), or as a drop from an elder guardian.

Goal: Power a furnace with lava
Smelt anything in furnace, smoker, or blast furnace using lava bucket as fuel. Put lava bucket in fuel slot. When the bucket is empty, you get the achievement.

Goal: Collect Dragon's Breath in a Glass Bottle.
During the fight with the ender dragon, press use while holding a glass bottle when the ender dragon uses its breath attack or shooting dragon fireball.

Goal: Teleport over 100 Blocks by throwing an Ender Pearl.
First, you need an ender pearl, then throw it. Make sure there are no obstacles in front, so you won't teleport there. You can also go to the top of mountains biome and throw an ender pearl to other biomes, make sure to face straight and little a bit looking up, not looking down. You can also get this achievement when you teleport from top of obsidian pillar to end fountain. Or once you beat the ender dragon, enter the end city portion of the end, through the end gateway with an ender pearl.

Goal: Respawn the Ender Dragon.
After you defeat an ender dragon, you can respawn ender dragon by placing 4 end crystals at end fountain.

Goal: Levitate up 50 blocks from the attacks of a Shulker.
First, you need to enter an end gateway, using water to swim through one block gap or by throwing ender pearl.
Once you teleported to outer islands, you need to find end city, where shulker can be found.
When shulkers shoot shulker bullets, move toward the bullet and let it hurt you, then you start to levitate, but you need to take damage of some bullet as a single bullet won't levitate high enough, and make sure there is no block above you. Because you will take some damage from the bullet, it's recommended to wear armor with Projectile Protection IV on all armor pieces. As you will fall down when the effect ends, your boots should be enchanted with Feather Falling IV, and/or drink potion of Slow Falling or eat a chorus fruit so it completely negates all fall damage. To brew potion of Slow Falling, you need phantom membrane dropped by phantom which can only spawn after the player has not slept for at least 3 days.

Then, extends it using redstone dust:

Goal: Fly with the Elytra through a 1 by 1 gap while moving faster than 40 m/s 
First, you need to find elytra in an end city. End cities have a chance of generating end ships, which is where elytra can be found. It is on item frame guarded by a shulker. Use an ender pearl to teleport there or utilize a shulker bullet.
Once you have elytra, wear it in the chestplate slot. You can glide now by press jump while falling.
To make your flying speed higher, you need fireworks. Recommended to craft using 3 gunpowder, so it will boost longer.

Try to fly through one by one block gap at high speed with the boost of a firework rocket, such as fly through end gateway.

Goal: Win 3 rounds in a row after one of the opponents has won 2 rounds.

Goal: Win a single round of Snowball Tumble without throwing any Snowballs.

Goal: Hit a single Player with 25 Snowballs in a single public round.

Goal: Hit a Player with a Snowball while falling into the Lava.

Goal: Push three Players into Lava using Snowballs in a single public round.

Goal: Stay on the top layer while winning a round in a Snowball Tumble Mini Game.

Goal: Win a Tumble game whilst on the lowest layer in a Snowball Tumble Mini Game.

Goal: Visit the Woodland Mansion or Monument while that Explorer Map is in hotbar.
First, you need to sell some paper and buy some empty maps from a novice-level cartographer villager, when the cartographer reach apprentice-level, buy a lot item frames and sell several glass panes. When cartographers reach journeyman-level, it's important to see what their offer. If the cartographer sells woodland explorer map or ocean explorer map, buy it which costs 12 emeralds and a compass. If the offer is an empty locator map, that means you must trade with another cartographer.
First, craft glass panes:

Then, craft compass:

After you bought the map, go to destination structure, while carrying that explorer map.

Goal: Rename a Shulker Box.
First, you must have a shulker box, which is crafted using a chest and 2 shulker shells, which are dropped from shulkers that spawn in end cities.

Then to rename it, you need an anvil:

Use anvil and put a shulker box in left most slot, its name should appear. Renaming it cost 1 experience level.

Goal: Defeat an Evoker
Kill an evoker, which can only spawn in woodland mansions or during raids. In woodland mansions, evokers can only spawn on the second and third floor, while during raids they start to spawn at wave 5. The easiest way to find evoker is via raids as the player doesn't need to travel far away, but requires Bad Omen before entering a village. Make sure to set the difficulty on normal or hard, as easy difficulty only consists of 3 waves of raids and there are no evokers during Wave 3.
Beware of the evoker fang and vexes, recommended to attack using a ranged weapon such as bow or crossbow.

Goal: Have the Totem of Undying in your hand when you die. 
You can get a totem of undying by killing an evoker, then placing the totem in your mainhand or offhand. Lastly, you need to die while holding totem.

Goal: Using the Frost Walker Boots, walk on at least one block on Frosted Ice on a Deep Ocean biome variant.
Frost Walker is treasure enchantment, so you can find it from chest in structure, fishing, trading with librarian villager, or killing raiding illager in raids.
If you cannot find deep ocean biomes, buy an ocean explorer map from a cartographer, as ocean monuments will only generate in deep ocean biomes variants. If the deep ocean is deep frozen ocean, the surface will be completely frozen, and you need to break some ice and walk on water, or go inside iceberg, since water only freezes when directly spotted to sunlight, while water in iceberg tunnels doesn't freeze. Once you transform water into frosted ice and walk at least one block, you get the achievement.

Goal: Lead a Caravan containing at least 5 Llamas.
An easy way to obtain this achievement is by killing the wandering trader, so you will get 2 lead with 2 tamed trader llama, leash one and another trader llama will form a caravan, for more llama you can wait for another wandering trader or go to mountains or savanna biomes, you can also breed regular llamas as baby llamas are also counted towards caravans (the trader llama cannot breed). The llamas don't need to be tamed.If you cannot find a lead, you can craft it using string and a slimeball:

Goal: Dye your Bed a different color.
Change your bed color by re-dyeing the bed using dye.
First, craft a bed:

Then, re-dye a bed:

Goal: Feed a Dolphin Raw Cod and have it lure you to treasure.
Feed a dolphin with raw cod, then follow it to the treasure, if dolphin stops moving, but no structure is located, feed it again until it leads you to ocean ruins or a shipwreck.
Dolphins can spawn on any ocean except frozen ocean and deep frozen ocean.

Goal: Find an Ocean Ruins.
As long you live in the ocean, this achievement is easy to achieve. If you don't live in the ocean, you need to find one. Create a map using a cartography table, so it only costs one paper instead of nine. Then, add a pointer by adding a compass to an empty map. After an empty locator is created, use the map and zoom in from scale level 1:1 to 1:8, which requires 3 papers if zoomed in using a cartography table. As you fill the map, you having a high chance to find ocean ruins, since it's commonly generated in the ocean, but rarely on lands. This method is very effective for frozen ocean biomes and deep variants since dolphins don't spawn here. Keep your eyes peeled, ocean ruins are made of a block, which resembles the ocean floor, in regular ocean, cold ocean, frozen ocean, and their deep variants ruins primarily made out of stone brick as the ocean floor is gravel, while in warm, lukewarm, and their deep variants primarily made out of sandstone as the ocean floor is sand.

Goal: Visit 9 Ocean biomes.
There are 11 ocean biomes variants, but 2 of them which are deep warm ocean and legacy frozen ocean are unused, so only 9 of ocean biomes which is:

Ocean
Warm ocean
Lukewarm ocean
Cold ocean
Frozen ocean
Deep ocean
Deep lukewarm ocean
Deep cold ocean
Deep frozen ocean
You can travel using boat or swimming. If you prefer swimming, boots enchanted with Depth Strider may help you move faster on water. Dolphin can also give you swimming speed boost to you.

Goal: Eat nothing but Dried Kelp for three in-game days.
Eat dried kelp once; in the following 3 in-game days, eat nothing but dried kelp. To obtain dried kelp, you need to find kelp, which can be found abundantly in ocean biomes variants except in warm ocean, frozen ocean, and deep frozen ocean. After you get kelp, cook it in furnace, smoker, or campfire.

Goal: Find a Shipwreck.
This achievement is a bit harder than finding ruins as shipwrecks are rarer than ocean ruins. On rare occasions, you may find shipwrecks on land. Shipwrecks will be easily visible as they are made out of planks, which easy to spot. Also, undamaged shipwrecks are more noticeable, especially in warm oceans, due to coral reefs making them easy to distinguish.

Goal: Catch Cod, Salmon, Pufferfish or Tropical Fish using Empty Bucket or Water Bucket.
Hold an empty bucket or water bucket, then press use on a cod, salmon, pufferfish, or tropical fish. Cod can only spawn in lukewarm, normal, and cold ocean (along with their deep variants). Pufferfish and tropical fish spawn only in warm oceans. Salmon spawn in cold, frozen ocean (along with their deep variants), river and frozen river. Salmon are the easiest to encounter, since rivers are easier to find than oceans.

Goal: Use Riptide Trident to launch yourself any distance with it.
To obtain a trident, you must kill some drowned. You can find them in the ocean and rivers or you can convert zombies into drowned. Drowned can still drop tridents, even when they don't spawn holding a trident.
After you have a trident, enchant it with Riptide. Since it can only be launched during rain or when on water, you can go to one block water then facing to the sky and throw the trident.

Goal: Open a Buried Treasure Chest.
To find buried treasure, first, you need to find treasure maps, this map can be found in shipwrecks and underwater ruins. Treasure maps usually lead you to beaches, snowy beaches, stone shores, or even mushroom field shores. If it generates in a stone shore, the buried treasure will usually generate higher than sea level. Buried treasure is marked with an 'X' on the map. Use your pickaxe to break stone and shovel to dig sand. Lastly, open the treasure chest.

Goal: Construct a Conduit.
Use prismarine, prismarine bricks, dark prismarine, or sea lanterns to make a conduit frame. Conduits can only active if the 333 area around it is filled with water. Prismarine, dark prismarine, sea lanterns, and prismarine bricks can be found in ocean monuments. Prismarine and sea lanterns can also be found in cold underwater ruins. You can also craft it from ingredients dropped by guardians.

Then, you need to find 8 nautilus shells, which is dropped by drowned that is holding it, bought from wandering traders or as fishing junk. Next, you need to find a heart of the sea, which always contains one in buried treasure.
Now, craft a conduit:

Goal: Spend 20 minutes underwater without any air. 
Brew 3 potions of Water Breathing (8:00). Drink a potion and stay underwater without losing oxygen. Each potion lasts for 8 minutes so you have an extra 24 minutes of water breathing, more than 4 minutes of the goal required. While you're underwater, you can explore underwater caverns, the sea floor, fight drowned, find structures such shipwrecks, ocean ruins, or ocean monuments, or build underwater to spend the 20 minutes.
Conduit Power also grants you underwater breathing indefinitely as long you are underwater near an active conduit.

Goal: Power a furnace with a Kelp Block.
First, you need to get 9 dried kelp, then craft it into a block, lastly use it as fuel in furnace.

Goal: Place four Sea Pickles in a group 
Find sea pickles in a warm ocean. Alternatively, if you cannot find a warm ocean, go to desert villages and find small houses that have 2 sea pickles as mugs. Then, place 4 sea pickles in a single block.

Goal: Place Scaffolding to the world limit. 
First, you need some string and bamboo. Bamboo can be found in large quantities at bamboo jungle biomes. Bamboo can also be found in jungle temple chests and appear rarely in regular jungles. It can also be caught as fishing junk in jungle biomes. Alternatively, if you cannot find jungle biomes, you can get bamboo from shipwreck supply chests.

Then go to a mountain biome or pillar jump to Y=320 then place one scaffolding on top of the pillar to save materials or place scaffolding until you reach the maximum world height limit.

Goal: Pickup gift from tamed Cat
First, travel to a village, which you will find stray cats there. Then, tame a cat using raw cod or raw salmon. Wait until a stray cat approaches you. Once tamed, you can see they have a cat collar. Now, sleep in a bed at night. When you sleep, the tamed cat will sleep with you and give you a gift in the morning. Pick up the gift and you get the achievement.

Goal: Breed Pandas
Pandas spawn in any jungle biomes, but are rarer in regular jungles. However, they are not rare in bamboo jungles. Find 2 pandas then make sure there is at least 8 bamboo nearby, or you can plant the bamboo manually. Once the requirement is met, use the bamboo to breed the pandas.

Goal: Use Enchanted Apple on Banner.
Find an enchanted apple, add paper to it in a crafting table to craft the thing banner pattern. Then, apply the pattern using a loom by combining the banner and dye.

Goal: Have 20 Tamed Cats
Cats spawn for every 4 beds in a village and the cat population is capped at 10 per village, so you need to travel to several villages to get 20 cats. Villages can be found in:

Plains
Savanna
Taiga
Desert
Snowy tundra
Snowy taiga

Goal: Trade for the Best Possible Price.
One way to achieve this is to get the Hero of the Village and from trading with villagers. Another way is to cure a zombie and trade with the new villager.

Goal: Use a Grindstone to get Experience from an Enchanted Item.
Grindstones can be found in village weaponsmith buildings, or you can craft one.
First, you need stone, you can obtain it by mining using Silk Touch or smelting cobblestone.

Then, craft stone slabs in crafting table:

You can also use stonecutter to craft stone slab. To craft a stonecutter:

Now, put stone in stonecutter to get stone slab:

Next, craft a grindstone.

Lastly, place the grindstone and disenchant your enchanted item using the grindstone by placing the enchanted item in the input slot and take out the output.

Goal: Kill a Pillager Captain.
There are 2 ways to find pillager captains, from pillager patrols or from pillager outposts. Pillager outposts can be found in biomes where villages can generate. Pillager captains can be easily distinguished between other pillagers as this pillager will be wearing a ominous banner on their head. Kill this mob and you will get achievement, plus the Bad Omen effect.

Goal: Walk in a Village with the Bad Omen effect applied.
You can trigger a pillager raid after you get the Bad Omen effect, which obtained after you kill a raid captain. Just enter a village boundary (at least 1 villager with 1 claimed bed) and the raid will start.

Goal: Ring the Bell while being chased by an angered Pillager or hostile mob that attacks villager in the Village.
Bells can be found in a village meeting point. They can be rung using redstone, projectile, or by pressing use on them. If you create your own village, bells are sold by armorer, toolsmith and weaponsmith villagers for 36 emeralds.

Goal: Defeat a Ravager.
Ravagers spawn during the 3 waves in raids. These mobs have 100  50 and have high melee damage. It's recommended to defeat these mobs from a distance as blocking with a shield can stun ravagers and cause them to roar, knockbacking and dealing damage to nearby mobs except for other illagers. Since this mob can only use a melee attack, build a 3 block pillar and shoot the ravager using a bow or crossbow until it dies.

Goal: Obtain 1,000 Emeralds from trading with Villagers.
This achievement can be easier with Hero of the Village effect, as it gives a trading discount, which lowers the price of items needed to trade with emeralds, so you require a fewer amount of items to exchange with emeralds.
As long you have huge crop farms, the best trade is crop trades from farmers as it can give you a huge amount of emeralds. Make sure to transform every villager in the village into farmer by placing as many composter as many villagers in villages, so they can restock their trades.

You can sell wheat, beetroots, potatoes, carrots, pumpkins, melon slices, and eggs to farmer villagers. Trade with villagers until you get 1000 emeralds or 15 stack of emerald + 40 emeralds.
If you craft it into block of emerald, it's equal to 111 blocks of emeralds with one extra emerald or a full stack of a block of emeralds + 47 blocks of emeralds and one emerald left.

Goal: Give Someone a Suspicious Stew.
To complete this achievement, you must throw a suspicious stew at another player and have them pick it up. Having a fox pick it up does not work.

Goal: Use a Campfire to collect Honey from a Beehive using a Bottle without aggravating the bees.
First, you need to have a bee nest or beehive you want to collect a honey bottle from. It only gives you the achievement if you collect a honey bottle and not honeycomb. Next you need to place a campfire under the beehive. Note that if you try to harvest any kind of honey from a beehive without placing a campfire underneath it, the bees will get angry. They will come out and sting you, which will hurt you, inflict you with Poison and kill the bees in about a minute. You will not get the achievement. Try to place the campfire a few blocks below the hive, otherwise the bees may injure themselves coming out. Remember that campfires will break and only give you Charcoal if you try to pick them up without Silk Touch. After you have "smoked" the hive like this, use a glass bottle on the hive to collect a honey bottle. You should then get the achievement.

Goal: Move and place a Bee Nest, with 3 bees inside, using Silk Touch.
First, you need to make sure you have a tool enchanted with Silk Touch. Any tool with the enchantment will work. If you try to collect a bee nest without Silk Touch, then it will break, disappear, and any bees inside and close by will get angry and attack you. Then you need to make sure three bees are inside the hive. If there aren't enough, you can breed bees with any kind of flower. Once three bees are inside, mine the nest with your Silk Touch tool. You should then get the achievement and can move the nest wherever you like.

Goal: Slide down a honey block to slow your fall.
This achievement is easiest obtained in 2 ways:

The first way is to place a honey block a block above the ground, and jump up, and move toward the block.
The second way is to copy the first one, but place more honey on top and pillar up.
Either way, it may take several tries.

Goal: Hit the bullseye of a Target block
First, craft a target block:

Then try to hit the center with any projectile.

Goal: distract a Piglin with gold
Go to the Nether and make a piglin aggressive (either by removing any gold armor you're wearing, hitting it or mining gold), then throw any gold related item and wait for the piglin to pick it up.

Goal: Wear a full set of Netherite Armor.
You need 24 diamonds and 4 netherite ingots to craft full set of netherite armor.
First, craft a full set of diamond armor.

Diamond armor can also be obtained from end city chest, bastion remnant chest, bought from armorer villager, or rarely dropped by zombies or skeletons.
Next, craft 4 netherite ingots. You need 16 gold ingots and 16 netherite scraps to craft 4 netherite ingots.

Netherite ingots can also be found in bastion remnant chests.

Last, convert from diamond armor to netherite armor.

Goal: Visit all Nether biomes.
Visit these 5 biomes by exploring the nether: basalt deltas, crimson forest, nether wastes, soul sand valley, and warped forest.

Goal: Free fall from build height limit (Y=320) to bottom of the world (min. Y=-62) and survive.
The easiest way to go down to minimum Y=-62 is go down to the deepest spot of a ravine or cave . Then, mine blocks until you reach the Y -62 coordinate.
To go up at Y=320, climb up on a tall mountain and place missing blocks to the build height limit or simple place blocks to a build height limit without climbing on anything.
To survive the fall, the easiest way is by placing water at the bottom of the world (Y=-62).

Achievements
Advancements
Tutorials/Advancement guide
Tutorials/Complete main adventure
Tutorials/Beginner's guide