This tutorial will help you become familiar with dual wielding, a mechanic added in the Combat Update.
Note that dual-wielding in Bedrock Edition is much more limited.  Most items cannot be put into the off-hand slot.

Before we begin the tutorial, it is important to recognize these two terms: main hand and off-hand. By default, the main hand is the player's right hand. Respectively, the player's off-hand is their left hand. Keep in mind that there is an option located in Skin Customization labeled "Main Hand" to swap the main hand and off-hand. This option may be helpful for players that are left-handed.

Dual wielding is when you hold two weapons, one in each hand, during combat. Despite the fact that dual wielding is not widely practiced in real life, it is used in various action and role-playing games, and is generally designed to provide the player more effectiveness or convenience in battle. Dual wielding in Minecraft can be used in combat, but it also can be used in other everyday activities, such as building, mining, and eating. It does have a few major limits, but learning through them and applying dual wielding to practical use can give players a large boost in productivity and a greater advantage above other players in PvP combat in-game.

In the inventory, there is a slot in the bottom-right side of the player avatar that looks like an outline of a shield. This is called the off-hand, hand slot. When you put something in it, you should see it being held on your off-hand (your left hand on default). Your other hand should also appear on the screen in first person view (you should see two hands on the screen). You should also see an extra slot with the off-hand item appear beside your HUD hotbar; this should be on the opposite side of your main hand.
For easy equipping to the off-hand slot, press F by default in Java Edition. This is configurable in the Controls settings. Using this, you can quickly equip something into your off-hand slot in your inventory and switch between the items in your hotbar and off-hand.

The off-hand can use the item it holds when there are no items in the main hand, or the item held on the main hand is not usable, e.g. swords and pickaxes.
Arrows that are held on the off-hand take priority over arrows in any other slot when you shoot a bow. This allows you to fire a specific arrow by selecting it using your off-hand. Conveniently, you can do vice-versa and hold the bow on the off-hand with arrows selected on your main hand. This also allows you to fire a specific arrow by selecting it using your main hand.
If you have a crossbow and some firework rockets, though, you can put the latter in the off-hand slot and (even if you have normal arrows) fire just that.

Though putting two weapons into your main and offhand is pretty useless as stated, the Mending effect is still used, meaning you can grind XP and repair tools.
Players cannot use both hands at the same time, and there is always a slight delay between using the main hand and off-hand. Thus you cannot instantly perform two actions together, such as placing and breaking blocks simultaneously or shooting two bows at once.
The main hand always takes priority when trying to use an item. For example, if you had stone in your main hand and dirt in your off-hand, you will always place the stone. The item in the off-hand will only be used if the item in the main hand lacks a use, or if it's holding nothing. If the item in the main hand cannot be used due to certain circumstances, then the off-hand is used. For example, if you have a block equipped on the main hand and a snowball on the off-hand, face anywhere you cannot reach a block (e.g. into the sky), and then press use, the snowball will be thrown instead of placing the block. This is because the block cannot be placed anywhere, and so your off-hand is used instead.
The main hand is also the only hand that can hit or break, even if there are no items in the main hand. This means that items in the off-hand lose their left-click function, making most weapons and tools unusable in the off-hand, with the exception of ones that have a use function.
Weapons that can be used on the off-hand in Java Edition:

Bow
Chicken eggs
Lingering Potions
Snowballs
Splash Potions
Trident
Crossbow
Tools that can be used on the off-hand in Java Edition:

Arrow
Bucket
Ender Pearl
Fishing Rod
Flint and Steel
Hoe (use on dirt to turn it into farmland)
Lead
Shears (use on a sheep to cut off its wool or on a pumpkin to carve it)
Shield
Shovel (use on a grass block, podzol, mycelium, dirt or coarse dirt to turn it into a path)
Axe (use on a log or wood to turn it into a stripped log or stripped wood)
Torch
Firework Rocket
Potions
Totem of Undying
Map
Tools that can be used on the off-hand in Bedrock Edition:

Shield
Totem of Undying
Map
Arrow
Firework Rocket
The Nautilus Shell can also be put in the off-hand slot in Bedrock Edition. This is most likely a bug and serves no purpose.

Players can now use both hands to do different actions with the left and right mouse buttons.
For example, if a player has a pickaxe in their main hand and a torch in their off-hand, right-clicking will place the torch.
This happens because a pickaxe lacks a right-click use, and therefore the game tries to then treat the other item as if it's being right-clicked.
Players can put an item on the "off-hand slot" in their inventory to hold it on their off-hand.
It is distinguished by an outline of a shield like symbol.
Pressing F (by default) will switch whatever item is selected in the hotbar with the item in the off-hand (including no item).
The off-hand slot is displayed next to the HUD when it's not empty (left for right-handed players and vice versa).
Only the main hand can be used for attacking or breaking.
An exception is items which do damage upon using them, such as bows or splash potions.
Bows determine what type of arrow to shoot based on the player's inventory and off-hand.
Arrows in the off-hand take priority over arrows in any other slot.
Otherwise, the closest stack of arrows to the first slot is used.
If the bow is in the off-hand, the selected hotbar slot takes priority.
If there are multiple arrow types and none held on the off-hand or main hand, the arrow on the first hotbar slot will shoot first.
The off-hand is invisible in first person view while it's empty.

Dual wielding is a useful addition to the game with many applications. It is entirely optional for players whether or not they want to utilize dual wielding; players can completely ignore the off-hand slot and, with few exceptions aside, continue to play like it was before 1.9. Some players who use dual wielding may experience efficiency and relief, but others may just experience more setbacks. Some may only use dual wielding to its minimal extent. Ultimately it is up to each player and their own style of playing to employ this mechanic into their gameplay.

Below is a list of practical dual wielding uses.