Griefing is the act of irritating and angering people in video games through the use of destruction, construction, or social engineering. Popularized in Minecraft by teams, griefing has become a serious problem for server administrators who wish to foster building and protect builders. Most players tend to dislike and frown upon griefing, while others feel it adds a certain degree of drama to the game.
The purpose of this page is to instruct players on how to prevent griefing, whether you're just a normal player or a server administrator/owner.

There are many other forms of griefing, many of them are variations of the ones listed above. Essentially, if moderators are attentive and the server is equipped with the necessary plugins, a server can be very secure from griefing and spamming.

While modifications to Minecraft clients are fairly popular with legitimate mods, griefers also often employ client modifications to aid their efforts. Apart from the mods below, griefing clients often include an in-game GUI to display enabled mods, as well as things such as chat commands (".commands") and keybinds to easily turn hacks on and off.
Warning: It is not recommended to purchase paid hacked clients, as the people behind them can never be trusted (whether they are bad programmers, scammers, untrustworthy, etc.). Hacked clients also never last forever; various paid hacked clients have been discontinued. Thus, if you pay money for a hacked client, you'll only be getting some months of usage until the hacked client gets discontinued. It will be a huge risk and a waste of your time. Never use cracked paid clients, they can ruin your computer with malware.

Crash: A hack that allows a player to teleport themselves to the World border and back by flying insanely fast between the Farlands and spawn. This usually crashes servers instantly and can only be combated with NoCheatPlus.
Kill Aura/Forcefield/Aimbot: Kill auras, and similar mods called ForceFields, automatically attack any players or mobs within range of the player.
Build: Build hacks are simply modifications that instantly place blocks in a predetermined pattern. Common builds include cubes, pillars, swastikas, and platforms.
Critical: This hack is used to make sure you always hit a critical attack upon another player and/or mob. There's one which forces it without actually jumping, and one which jumps before attacking. Both are effective.
ESP: This hack draws a 3D box around a player, which is viewable from a long distance and through blocks to locate them. In some cases, it also displays some info, such as the object in hand, armor, or coordinates.
FastPlace: This modification eliminates the normal delay when placing blocks. This may also be applied to placing eggs in order to create a lot of entities in a short amount of time. Rebinding the use key to certain keys on the keyboard increases the click rate to 20 clicks per second, making this feature possible in vanilla Minecraft.
Throw or Egg: A hack similar to FastPlace. The difference is that while FastPlace very rapidly places blocks and throws entities, Throw is used to throw a lot of entities such as eggs or snowballs instantly. It can be used to lag the server.
Flight or Fly: Not necessarily used just for griefing, this hack gives the user the ability to fly similar to as if they were in Creative mode, often at adjustable speed levels like in Spectator mode.
Spider: This mod, similar to but less obvious as flight, causes every block the player encounters to be treated as if it had vines, allowing access to areas not normally accessible, used for griefing and especially for PvP.
Freecam: This mod allows the user to separate themselves from their body and fly around to scout out areas. Since infinite reach was patched, the user of this mod cannot affect any blocks outside their reach radius. However, this hack can be used to peek into obsidian bases, and open chests within the player's reach distance.
Fullbright: This hack lights up all blocks as if they were in direct sunlight, even in pitch blackness. The addition of the "Night Vision" potion enables this feature to be obtainable in vanilla Minecraft, and it's possible by editing the gamma within the options.txt file (line 4, in-game called Brightness, ranging from 0.0 (moody) to 1.0 (bright)) to 12.0 or more.
Godmode: This makes the user invincible, preventing them from being able to take damage. Almost all versions of this hack have been patched, but there are still some versions that exist.
HighJump: This allows the player to jump higher than normal, often at an adjustable jump height.
NoFall: This hack prevents damage from being taken when falling from high areas. This was implemented into vanilla in the form of /gamerule fallDamage.
Nuker or Annihilator: This destroys all blocks within reach automatically and quickly. They are also often configurable, allowing the user to destroy only certain block types.
Sneak: This allows griefers to sneak indefinitely, and without being slowed down. This will keep their nameplates hidden behind walls just as if they were holding the sneak button.
Spam or Flood: This allows the client to send a large number of chat messages to the server, and often very quickly. This is partially patched in vanilla, with the "disconnect.spam" kick message if you send messages too fast. Copying and continuous pasting a message into the chat provides a similar effect, usually at slower speeds than mods.
SpeedMine or FastBreak: This allows the user to break blocks much faster than normal. It does not usually work on blocks such as obsidian, however.
Instant or OneClick: Similar to yet different from SpeedMine. Instant and OneClick both allow the user to click blocks once without holding their mouse down, and a short time after, the block will break as if they had clicked and held to break it. This makes it easier to destroy multiple blocks quickly.
Step: This modification allows for the user to simply walk up multiple blocks as if they were slabs. The number of blocks is usually adjustable.
Tracers: This hack draws a line, which starts at the crosshair and ends at another player's position. It is used to locate a player accurately.
X-Ray or Wallhack: Stops the rendering of any block besides ores desirable to the griefer. This hack is often used to find chests or valuable minerals such as diamond. It can be partially prevented using Bukkit server plugins that disguise ores and chests that are not adjacent to transparent blocks. People, however, have made resource packs that only have ore block textures, bypassing cheat detectors.
Sprint or Speed: This will make the player sprint at the normal sprint speed, or faster. Most of the time, this will not deplete hunger. Other speed hacks can make you run at several times normal speed, enabling you to travel huge distances in a short time.
AutoSoup: This will automatically eat mushroom stew, which in turn heals typically 3 hearts of health. This modification is only useful on servers where mushroom stew heals health, typically Kit/Faction PVP servers. When this mod is used, the soup is usually taken from inside the inventory and when the bowls are empty, they get stacked inside the inventory.
AutoTool: Upon the player clicking on a block, this hack will automatically switch to the most efficient tool in the player's hot bar to break, or to harvest, the block. There are also more advanced and well-designed AutoTools, which will select the tool based on factors such as enchantments, durability, and whether or not you want speed of breaking the block over the ability to harvest the block (for example, swords can break some blocks faster without harvesting the actual block, while shears can harvest some blocks, but not break them as fast).
AutoRespawn: Upon the death of the player, this hack will automatically send a respawn packet to the server, resulting in the player respawning without the need for clicking the "Respawn" button. Most AutoRespawn hacks are poorly designed, so if you died in hardcore mode, the hack would still send a packet, causing the screen to freeze. Some anticheats, such as Spartan, attempt to counter AutoRespawns by testing for how fast the server receives the packet, but this is a very ineffective way to detect the hack, albeit being one of the only ways. Later made vanilla as a gamerule in Java Edition (doImmediateRespawn) and Bedrock Edition (immediateRespawn).

Griefing is difficult to prevent and virtually impossible to avoid on anarchy servers, but as a normal player, you can take steps to make your base harder to find, and ultimately, harder to grief.

Remember that the more people that know about your base, the more likely it is that it can be griefed due to people sharing the coordinates to a potential griefer.
Building far away from spawn will make your base harder to find. Also, do not build near any major roads or highways.
Making the base out of blast-resistant, nonflammable materials (such as concrete) will make your base tougher, though dedicated griefers will probably have enough explosives to do a sizable amount of damage.
Hidden, underground bases can be useful if you never want to be found.
If you see your base or another base being griefed, record the griefer and report it to the server owners.
Use ender chests. Ender chests, while expensive early on, have a different inventory for each player, meaning that no one else can access your ender chest. Storing items in shulker boxes and storing them in your ender chest will drastically increase your available inventory space.
Build in the nether.
To slow down hackers if you have an underground base, cover it in lava (make it look natural!) and limit how many storage items you have.
To combat a griefer, try adding traps to your base, and hide your chest of valubles.
Make your house look like a noobs'. Most griefers care about diamonds and other stuff, so make a 2" dirt house and just hide your good things underground.
Never be intimidated by a griefer's threats. If you see a griefing happen and the griefer tells you to stay shut, still tell the admins. The griefer will probably be banned, and even if they get payback, it's better that your diamonds are stolen than 20 players diamonds are stolen. Be considerate for your fellow players.

While there is not much that can stop a determined griefer, there are ways for a server to mitigate the risks of being griefed. The following is a list of steps server owners can take to try to keep their server protected:

Protect the server with appropriate anti-griefing plugins.
Do not let administrators abuse their power (this can incite anger in users and bring about griefing). Also, be cautious in choosing who to give administrative permissions, to begin with.
Ban certain items in Bukkit, like Flint and Steel or Fire.
Should power abuse happen constantly or in severe cases, it may be a wise idea to be the only administrator.
Be careful what permissions to which people have access. Owners can limit access with Server modifications.
Be careful where the server is advertised. While more exposure means more members, it also means griefers can find it just as easily.
Become familiar with what griefers are capable of doing. There are no hacks "to gain op" or "delete the server". If one takes the time to learn what is possible (by watching griefing videos and reading griefing forums), you will be more able to counter it.
Change servers so that only you or people you trust (in real life, since all you know about people you meet online is what they tell you) can do big things (such as banning other players).
Use whitelists to only allow people you trust on the server.
For a much more in-depth (and anti-grief biased) analysis, see Crayboff's thread on the topic. You can also watch who you let on your server or realm

While there are many people creating grief-friendly client modifications, there are equally dedicated programmers creating server plugins to foil their attempts. Using the popular and extensible Bukkit server software and other Server Mods, programmers have made numerous add-ons to enforce correct client behavior. There are plugins that allow administrators to log and rollback all edits done on an individual basis, employ jails to trap griefers, and even protect certain blocks or entire chunks.

Griefing is far from a new phenomenon in video games. It dates to the late 1990s, when it was used to describe the willfully antisocial behaviors seen in early massively multiplayer online games like Ultima Online and first-person shooters like Counter-Strike. Frustrated users or mal-intentioned gamers have oftentimes tried to cause grief among other players in multiplayer servers they join, but many griefers just "do it for the lulz", or just out of plain boredom. An increase in organized griefing occurred with the creation of teams producing their own videos which popularized Minecraft griefing. Fortunately for server administrators, the increase in griefing has pushed the creation of numerous anti-griefing tools and techniques.

Griefing - Wikipedia article on griefing