Tree farming is the process of planting a large number of saplings and waiting for them to grow into trees. These trees are then harvested for wood and more saplings, which can be used to grow another generation of trees. This can be repeated indefinitely, yielding a regular supply of logs without the hassle of covering large areas of terrain, therefore making wood a renewable resource. A secondary benefit of tree farming is that it allows conservation of the surrounding environment. The use of bone meal can speed up the process, or players can just plant the saplings and go do something else while they grow.
For detailed information on the mechanics of tree growth and structure, see the article on trees.

Tree harvesting is an essential first step for any player in Survival mode. The wooden blocks can be harvested for wood, without requiring tools, although an axe quickens harvesting. Each wood can be crafted into planks and sticks, which are used to craft tools, like a wooden pickaxe and similar wood-derived materials.
Wood can also be smelted into charcoal, a functional, easily renewable substitute to coal.
When leaves are harvested, or decay naturally, they have a chance to drop a sapling of their own species, which can be planted to grow a new tree. Decaying oak and dark oak tree leaves also have a 1/200 chance of dropping an apple.
Destroying leaves does not require a tool; a sword is negligibly faster than bare hands but wears out the sword. Using a hoe increases the speed of breaking leaves, with an iron hoe able to mine them instantly. Using shears harvests usable leaf blocks for the player to pick up and later place elsewhere. Use of fire also destroys leaves quickly, but when used on a tree, fire also destroys much of the wood. Also, any leaf block unconnected or too far from a block of wood decays naturally over time.
Wood is also one of the most used building blocks in the game, used as pillars, flooring or simply as the main building material for base building.
Aside being used as a building material, wood is also essential in crafting. Chests, hoppers, tools, fences, torches, etc. have wood as one of its materials and are thus really important.

Because all eight types have different advantages and disadvantages, the best tree to choose can vary with the situation: 

Oak is plentiful and convenient in compact spaces, making it the best at the beginning of the game. Oak leaves can also drop apples.
Birch grows quickly and has the most uniform height, and is ideal for automatic farming, making it the best in moderately sized fields.
Dark Oak grows extremely quick, has a larger average yield than oak, and is considerably more compact and safer to harvest than jungle giants. Dark oak leaves can also drop apples. Difficult to farm automatically.
Jungle size and its tendency to spawn branches is ideal for mass-production of raw wood yield per tree, making it the best late game tree if provided plenty of time and space. The giant variant is difficult to farm automatically, however the smaller version is considerably easier to automatically farm.
Acacia is ideal for space-efficient farming. Also difficult to farm automatically, however the amount of logs per tree almost makes it viable.
Spruce is easy to find, but is too tall for convenient harvesting, and is not especially convenient to farm. The giant variant is good for time-efficient wood-quantity especially when a spiral technique is applied to harvest it. The giant variant is difficult to automate, however, with a fast enough layout it is well worth it.
Huge fungus is only found in the nether and require a nylium block to grow on. They are space-efficient, however. They grow only when bone meal is used. The near nonexistent growth restrictions allow great freedom for automated farming. And much like the giant spruce trees, if you have a fast enough layout it is well worth it. Plus they also grow other useful blocks, such as shroomlights and weeping vines.
Azalea trees  can be farmed for azalea and flowering azalea leaves. They also yield oak wood without the chance of growing a difficult to remove large oak tree. Azalea trees can also be fully automatically farmed without any player input using moss farms.
Mangrove is a rare tree, but they can be planted underwater and they create mangrove roots, which can be used as extra fuel. Bone mealing the leaves also produces a guaranteed propagule.
Cherry is also rare, and their logs grow very unpredictably, but cherry wood has a very unique texture.
Bamboo can also be made into wood. While it takes a lot of bamboo to make planks, it is easily farmable. See this page for more details.

Different kinds of trees have different wood textures. If building wooden structures, you may choose a specific type of wood for its texture. Because the efficiency difference among tree types is only slight, appearance often has priority. If building or decorating with multiple wood types, having a tree farm for each is also useful.

Azalea Trees

What players need:

At least 4 saplings of any kind
A chest for storage (optional)
An axe of any type to speed up the job (optional)
First dig 1 block down. Count 4 blocks to the left and dig 1 block down. 4 blocks left again, dig one down. Repeat one more time. Then plant a sapling in every hole:

Wait a day (or use bone meal), then harvest the trees and get the saplings. Place the chest nearby to store the saplings (and axe, if players have one) in there. Then, you can extend the grid if you like, as long as all the saplings are the same type. (Mixing types can work, but the timing and space requirements get a bit messier.) You can add a torch in the middle to make the saplings able to grow at night and also ward off some mobs.

Spruce and jungle trees can be planted and grown just like any other tree. But unless you only need a small amount of wood quickly, this is not useful. Not only are regular jungle trees slightly too large to harvest easily, but the jungle trees drop saplings rarely, and may not even replace the one used to grow them.
However, four saplings can be grown into the respective "giant spruce" and "jungle giant" forms, by planting them in a 22 formation: 

Aside from the saplings, make sure there are no blocks less than 2 blocks away from the saplings (even torches), at any height up to the future height of the tree trunk (up to 32 blocks). A huge tree needs a 22 thick trunk to grow. These trees average ~96 wood (1 stacks), and some can exceed 2 stacks. Bone meal can be used on any one of the saplings to make the tree grow more quickly. (Dark Oak must be planted similarly, but they don't grow tall enough to require the special harvesting techniques.)

Especially if breaking the leaves on the spot, this can be most of a Minecraft day's work. Plan aheadyou may want to wait out the night 10 or 15 blocks up atop the trunk. Every so often, go back down to the ground to collect fallen wood and saplingsif you try to leave them until you've finished, some of the first logs and saplings reach their 5-minute expiration. The fastest way to harvest a giant tree is with a diamond axe and shears or an iron hoe.
If you're using stone axes, bring a spare, because axes get used up quickly. With wood axes, bring at least four of them to be safe. Likewise for your shears or hoe.
Harvesting trees is a bit harder, since the trees are really tall. You can do with a top-down technique or with a spiral-up technique.

Top down: get up and cut down. Less thinking needed and more efficient for fast (enchanted diamond or netherite) axes.
Getting up:
For jungle giants, you can use those shears to harvest vines from two or three sides of the trunk to complete a track to the top, breaking or shearing the upper leaves.
For giant spruces or if you can't be bothered with the vines, you can just bring a half-stack of ladders. If you do need ladders, but haven't got them, you can take a block or few of wood in a column (that is, a groove up the trunk), use those to make some ladders, and run the ladders up the groove, making more ladders as needed and as you mine the tree. You might need to make a crafting table with the first block.
When you reach the top, find one block of wood standing above the other three. Chop that to start the canopy decaying.
For jungle giants, it's best to stand on the trunk and clear all foliage above your foot level, then use the remaining leaves as a floor to get at branches and the edges of foliage. Go down level by level like this until you've got all the brancheswatch for knots of foliage that aren't decaying even though they're separated from the trunk.
For spruce trees, it usually suffices to cut away the foliage from the trunk (as far below your level as you can reach), to speed decay.
When you've got all the branches for a jungle giant, or immediately for a giant spruce, you can simply cut your way down the trunk.
Spiral up: cut a staircase out of the tree. No extra tools needed. As fast as top-down for normal axes.
Start by cutting three bottom blocks (height 1,2,3) out of the right (or left) side the tree. Go inside the space you just created, cut up three higher blocks (height 2,3,4) on the neighboring part. Go up that block, turn left (or right), and repeat (height 3,4,5) until you make it to the top.
Now make you way down by going down four stairs, chopping away what is above you, and repeat. If you have see a branch, cut that down first, using the leaves as a floor.
When you are on the ground, just finish up the little stump you have left.
If you want to be able to pause your work or are just afraid of heights, you can put a block of water around the dirt blocks where tree sapings sit on. If you are working with spruce trees, increase the depth to two blocks in case leaves grow over them.

Since the player can only harvest 7 blocks above the ground without climbing on something, the most efficient tree farm design limits the height of trees to 9 blocks. This allows 7 blocks of logs as a "trunk" and 2 block of leaves above that. This is accomplished by adding a ceiling at 10th block above the ground, leaving a space 9 blocks high in which trees can grow. This allows all of the wood from the trees to be harvested quickly and with minimal effort. The other option is to grab what you can from the ground and use a flint and steel to burn what you can't reach.
It should be noted that leaving 9 blocks of space for trees to grow does not guarantee that all trees grow to this height. Trees grow with trunks 4-7 blocks in height, but not higher. Some may also grow branches despite the height limitation.
This height issue can also be avoided by planting a sapling on the bottom of a 2-block-deep hole. This ensures that the top layer of the tree remains reachable, and has the added benefit of preventing mobs from hiding in the shadow of the tree and surviving daylight. It also prevents growth of the smallest size, whose leaves would be blocked by the hole.
Note that oaks can grow through certain blocks: Small oaks can replace many blocks (fences, glass (but not glass panes), paintings, stairs, pistons, torches, buttons, ladders and doors), while the branch wood of large oaks can grow through even solid blocks (including bedrock).
Because trees grow underground with a nearby light source, and also grow when in direct or diagonal contact with other trees, quite compact arrangements can be used for efficient use of space.
Underground saplings rely on torch light to grow. Various patterns of saplings and torches can be used to achieve varying degrees of space efficiency. Since saplings only require light level 9 to grow, a single torch starting at light level 14 can sufficiently light 60 saplings. However, this torch-efficient model comes at the cost of stability. Trees can grow and block the torch light to other saplings. Underground tree farms should stay clear of magma blocks because a bug relating to the south-east rule may let magma affect any leaf/wood blocks occupying the same corner.

It is also possible to grow trees to maximize wood for the territory. However, because the canopies overlap, you harvest fewer saplings. Oak, birch, jungle, and acacia trees ignore logs of their own kind when calculating when to grow. However, spruce trees still require two blocks between other trees.

The most space-efficient way to prevent grown trees from blocking light to other saplings is to have every sapling
directly next to a torch (not diagonal). This strategy yields a basic space efficiency of 80% since the pattern is made up of units of 1 torch + 4 saplings. The plus-sign shaped units can be arranged to completely fill an area.
It is recommended that the perimeter walkway and all blocks with a torch underneath be a different material, such as cobblestone. This allows for quick visual identification during re-planting, of which blocks get saplings and which get torches that may have been inadvertently knocked out during harvest. It is recommended to do the same for torches on the wall, as these may get knocked off by growing trees. If you dig down two blocks instead, and place the torches under glass blocks, the trees still receive the proper light level, and you are far less likely to inadvertently break your light structure during harvesting or replanting.
A 11 by 7 farm, utilizing 61 Saplings and 22 torches, with a perimeter walkway.

This design takes account for the fact that all saplings adjacent to the walkway are supplied by light from the torches on the walkway. Thus the farm yields an efficiency of 84%.
Note when the tree farm is cut down, the amount of returned saplings per tree is much lower than cutting trees in a forest, as the canopy is shared by many trees. Using an iron Hoe with Fortune III to break the leaves will, on average, will drop enough saplings to replant the farm.

Unlike oak trees, spruce and birch trees never grow to a branched tree. This makes them easier to harvest, but to farm Birch and Spruce trees efficiently, more space is required.
Birches can be planted next to other birches with 2 blocks of space between them since the birch leaves can overlap with other birch leaves. This same spacing holds true for spruces. However, when planting the different types of trees together, birch and spruce trees need 4 blocks of space in between the saplings (the tree does not grow if leaves of a different tree are obstructing its path). Both birch and spruce trees require 9 blocks of vertical space above the sapling to grow regularly (10 is more efficient for growth). Both spruce and birch grow with less space, but not as regularly. Like other saplings, they must receive light level 8 or better to grow.

Acacia trees require six blocks of space from the sapling to the ceiling, if there is any, and at least two empty blocks to each wall. So the minimum space that an acacia tree requires to grow is an empty rectangular cuboid over the sapling of 6(height)  5(wide)  5(long) blocks.

Using the same spacing as a birch farm, one can grow individual jungle tree saplings as small jungle trees. Without fortune enchantments, a single tree would not produce enough saplings to replace itself. A 33 grid of trees growing will usually produce enough saplings to replace itself in the long term, and occasionally produces 1-2 excess saplings. After 6-7 real life hours of hovering over the farm, cutting down, and replacing trees as they grow, a profit of about 10-20 saplings can be accumulated this way. A starting supply of 9 planted saplings and 18 back stock for the eventual stretch of losses is necessary to keep the initial tree grid planted at all times. After enough iterations, the ultimate result is a profit in jungle saplings.

Nylium Platform
Huge fungi require Bone Meal, Nylium and Fungi to farm. You can make a platform of nylium, apply bonemeal until it generates fungi, then quickly grow the fungi and break the bottom stem to prevent the nylium from decaying.  Cut down the fungus, and break the vegetation and nether wart blocks that generate and compost them, along with all the non-fungus vegetation that generates with using the bone meal on the nylium. With luck, you can get enough bone meal to do it all over again. You can always farm some other vegetation to produce enough bone meal to make sure you do not run out.

Nether exploration
Collecting huge fungi blocks in their own biomes is a great way to collect a sufficient amount of wood and decorative blocks early game. 
The fastest way to use this method is to make an efficiency 5 netherite axe and hoe, then travel to the nether and fly around using an elytra until you come across a warped or crimson forest. If it's a crimson forest, be sure to bring warped fungus to repel hoglins (must be planted, with an area of effect of 15 blocks). 
After planting a fungus, build a 3x3 platform of gold blocks with a beacon on top for the haste 1 effect. Fly up from the beacon base and destroy the netherrack obstructing the beacon beam. The haste 1 effect reduces the mining time per stem block by 2gt.  
This also helps when mining wart blocks and shroomlights, as when combined with an efficiency 3 netherite or diamond hoe, you can mine each block in 1gt. Setting up and removing a 1 layer beacon in the nether takes on average 600gt, so this beacon method is effective only if you are mining more than 300 stem blocks, or if it is necessary for instant mining more than 38 blocks. 
Once the beacon is set up, you can begin harvesting trees. Huge Fungi normally generate together in clumps, so it's best to climb to the top using twisting vines, and then mine from the top down. Be sure to use a hoe to mine the leaf blocks (wart blocks and shroomlights), and your axe to harvest the stems.

To marginally increase speed, carry with you a few shulker boxes of unbreaking 3, efficiency 5, gold axes to reduce the mining speed by 1gt per stem block. 

Greenhouse
Place 2 nylium in a 3x3 grid pattern with 6 blocks in between each one. Then construct a water stream platform beneath it. Have the water stream funnel the items into a chest storage, connected by a hopper. To use the manual farm, place down a fungus on each nylium block, then grow the fungi using bone meal. Now climb to the top using ladders, a bubble column, scaffolding or vines, and mine out the huge fungi from the top down. After harvesting the huge fungi, collect any items that didn't drop into the water stream below.

Semi-automatic
Semi-automatic harvesting is when everything in a farm is self-sufficient except for the input. 
In the case of semi-automatic huge fungi farms, this would be the placement of fungi plants and often, but not always, supplying it with bone meal.
The positives of a semi-automatic design, is that they're fast, inexpensive to construct, lag friendly on small scales, and produces every block from the tree (wart blocks, shroomlights and weeping vines included).

This is a nether tree farm designed by ncolyer dubbed as "The Menace". The design is fairly complex but to simplify, it uses TNT dupers to destroy the logs and pistons to destroy the wart blocks. A modified design includes a system to convert byproducts such as vines, wart blocks and shroomlights to bonemeal to fully AFK the farm without the worry of running out of bonemeal. In all, it produces 80,000 logs per hour.

Mangrove trees are really tall, and require a horizontal footprint of 13 by 13 blocks to grow fully. They are very difficult to harvest from the ground up, because their log usually starts a few blocks above the ground, and the logs branch in all sorts of different directions, which is very hard to trace when digging through the leaves. Therefore, the best way to mine these trees manually is a top-down approach. However, these trees are usually very tall and difficult to get on top of. Despite this difficulty, mangrove trees possess a unique trait that stands out among other trees: they can be planted underwater.
To farm these trees underwater, find a flat lakebed or ocean floor that is at least 10 blocks deep, place the mangrove propagule in the middle, and use bone meal on it. The tree will grow, and you can easily swim to the top and start harvesting it downwards. Because you will stay underwater for long periods of time, a helmet with Aqua Affinity or a conduit might be helpful. Because mangrove leaves do not drop saplings, There is no point to wait for all of them to decay before you plant the next tree, so you can simply mine out all the logs and mangrove roots, and then start planting the next tree.
Because mangrove propagules can be easily obtained by using bone meal on mangrove leaves, you can simply harvest a bunch of propagules, then start planting new trees without worrying about propagule collection at all.

You can much more easily collect all the logs if you farm multiple trees in a special shape.

It does not matter if the birch trees are replaced by spruce or vice-versa.
To collect it in this fashion simply do as below:
Chop all or most of the birch or spruce trees down to a stump and jump on each and every stump to collect the top logs.
Cut a two-high notch into one of the oaks, one block above where you currently are, and jump up into it.
Now you can either jump one higher into the jungle or another oak's trunk after collecting all the logs overhead.
Continue step 3 until you have harvested all the upper logs.
Get rid of the stumps or "pillars" you stood on.
Repeat all steps to content.

In EthosLab's LP episode 51, Etho has a tree farm with 24 trees growing side by side in a 7x7 square. The tree/dirt part looks like:

The farm should be put above a flowing source of water to auto-collect the drops. In Etho's version, the farm is put in the middle of a 13x13 square,
and on each corner of the square is a water block. This takes all drops from the leaves to the center point of the setup, where you can place a hopper.
After setting up the farm, just put a sapling (oak, birch, or spruce) on every dirt block. If you want to plant 25 trees, you can put a dirt block in the dead center.

Although somewhat complex to build (as opposed to planting saplings and just waiting or applying bone meal and then manually chopping them down), these automatic tree farms allow you to harvest wood at a much faster rate by automating the gathering and block breaking portions of tree farming.

Focusing only on the growth portion of the farm, these designs allow you to quickly grow hundreds of trees by pressing down a mouse button and then ignoring it. A dispenser with bone meal automatically forces the tree to grow, and a column of pistons pushs the trunk into a collection area where it is stacked in a large block for you to later 'mine'. The more complex designs also include leaf breaking, meaning that you end up with a net positive on the saplings and in the case of oak trees get apples without having to do much of anything.
After a few minutes you then go over to the storage area and mine out all the wood blocks in much the same way as you would cave-mine; meaning that you do not have to waste time by moving from one tree to the other.

Smallest auto tree farm design (no sapling collection, oak only)

Auto tree farm design (breaks all leaves, for oak trees only)

Auto tree farm design (breaks all leaves, can use any tree type except spruce and dark oak)

As of update 1.14, it's possible to make a TNT based tree farm, or TNTree, with 100% drop rate for saplings, apples, sticks and logs.

Several mobs in the game can break blocks, and most of them have been used for wood farming. An overly complex design featuring creepers was made, but the insane size of it makes constructing it anywhere exceptionally difficult. A different design that uses ghasts is also available and much simpler to make, however when ghasts break blocks they destroy (without dropping) most of them, making tree farming with the ghast extremely inefficient.
The wither makes it possible to auto-break blocks by using the wither's ability to break any blocks within a 334 area (4x6x4 on bedrock edition) of it one second after it has been damaged. The wither can be trapped in bedrock in any of the dimensions. Because of the larger breaking area on Bedrock Edition, you can grow oak, birch, jungle, acacia, spruce, and even dark oak (by using boats to shift the breaking area) inside the breaking area of the wither.

A newer method of caging in the wither has also been found that enables a tree farm to be build anywhere while at the same time using the wither to break the wood blocks. Although potentially more dangerous than encasing the Wither in bedrock (as in the above design), this cage has been found to be completely reliable as long as it is built correctly. It works by distracting each head with mobs without them being able to damage those mobs.

These tree farms work with all tree types except for dark oak. The only reason it does not work with dark oak is because they have a 2x2 block trunk. The section below covers those.

These are nearly non-existent because dark oak trees grow with a 22 trunk and have extremely specific growth restrictions.

Fungi can be generated from using bone meal on nylium. The bone meal can be generated by composting the Wart Blocks from a grown Huge Fungus. Combine this with a flying machine and a TNT duplicator for breaking the blocks and add some sorting mechanisms, a self-sustaining farm is made.
Since nylium decays when an opaque block (like tree stem) is above it, it is recommended that players stay away from the farm so that random ticks don't land on the nylium blocks. A smaller-scale version for logs only (without the TNT and composting) is shown to the right.

Apart from being placed on it's respective nylium block, fungi have no growth restrictions thus removing the need for double piston-extender walls. This allows for rapid cycle speeds, and fast rates for minimal build effort. Wart Blocks and Shroomlights can be composted to provide a semi-self-sustaining functionality.
Simple huge fungus farm for starter worlds

More advanced huge fungus farm for increased drops and efficiency

Players can also create farms that automatically place saplings and break logs by either using an auto clicker or holding f3+t in some versions. In 1.13, logs were changed to become stripped logs when right clicked by a player holding an axe of any kind. These types of farms won't give you the raw logs you need for building, but can give you sufficent wood for crafting mass items.