A lever is a non-solid block that can provide switchable redstone power.

A lever can be mined using any tool, or without a tool, and always drops itself as an item.

A lever is also removed and drops as an item if:

its attachment block is moved, removed, or destroyed
water or lava flows into its space, in Java Edition
a piston tries to push it or moves a block into its space

Three levers are generated naturally in each jungle temple. They also generate in woodland mansions and ancient cities.

A lever can be used as a player-switchable redstone power source.

A lever can be attached to the top, side, or bottom of any full solid opaque block (stone, dirt, blocks of gold, etc.), or to the top of an upside-down slab or upside-down stairs (but not to the bottom of a right-side-up slab or stairs). When placed on the top or bottom of a block, the lever orients itself in-line with the placing player.
In Bedrock Edition, it can additionally be placed on the top of a fence, stone wall or hopper, and can be placed underwater.
When placed on the side of blocks, down is on and up is off. On the top or bottom of blocks, off is north or west, on is south or east.

To activate or deactivate a lever, use the "Use Item/Place Block" control (right-click, by default). A lever can be turned on and off as fast as it can be clicked.
Mobs cannot turn a lever on or off.

While active, a lever:

powers any adjacent redstone dust (including beneath the lever) to power level 15
powers any adjacent redstone comparator or redstone repeater facing away from the lever to power level 15
strongly powers its attachment block to power level 15 (only if the attachment block is a full solid opaque block)
activates any adjacent mechanism components, including above or below, such as pistons, redstone lamps, etc.
emits redstone particles to indicate that it is active.

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

Java Edition:

Bedrock Edition:

For a more in-depth breakdown of changes to textures and models, including a set of renders for each state combination, see /Asset history

Issues relating to "Lever" are maintained on the bug tracker. Report issues there.

Taking Inventory: Lever  Minecraft.net on November 29, 2019